

9/11/2025
1
AGRICULTURAL MARKETING
(AAE33103)
Provided By:
LUANAR-NRC
Faculty of Natural Resources and Life Sciences
Department of Agriculture & Food Systems
1
MODULE DETAILS
LECTURE HOURS30
CREDIT HOURS2.0
METHOD OF ASSESSMENT
Continuous Assessment 40%
End of Semester Examination 60%
2
PREAMBLE
•What is the backbone of Malawi’s Economy?
•What percentage of the rural population does agriculture support in 
rural areas?
•Which agricultural commodities does Malawi Export?
•Where does Malawi export its agricultural commodities?
•What challenges/risks are associated with agricultural production & 
marketing?
•Does government have a role/part to rectify risks/challenges which 
affect agricultural production & marketing?
3
AIM & OBJECTIVES OF MODULE
AIM OF MODULE
The course aimsto equip students in agriculture with knowledge, skills and practices
in Agricultural Marketingto assist farmers make informed decisions regarding
productionand marketing of producein order to maximise profits.
MODULEOBJECTIVES
By the end of the module students should be able to:
Explain key conceptsused in marketing as applied in agriculturalsector.
Apply basic economic concepts in Agriculturalmarketing
Describe strategies for attracting and sustaining demand for agricultural products
efficiently for farmers
Apply agricultural policies in agricultural marketing
4

9/11/2025
2
TOPICS OF STUDY
Key Terminologies and Concepts:Farms marketing; Needs, wants,
satisfaction & product/service; Exchange, transaction and market;
Marketing concept; Market utility; Demand, Supply and Elasticity;
Market Structures
Introduction to Marketing:Meaning and importance of marketing; Role
of marketing in the value chain; Problems in Agricultural marketing;
Unique features of Agricultural products; Classification of markets
Marketing Functions:Classification of marketing functions; Marketing
mix (product, price, promotion and place); Market intelligence and
market research; Intermediaries and marketing agencies; Agricultural
marketing institutions (ADMARC, ACE etc.)
5
TOPICS OF STUDY...
Agricultural Marketing Linkages and Strategies for Minimising Risk:Market
integration; Marketing efficiency; Marketing costs; Market margins and mark-
up; Risks in marketing produce; Methods of minimising risk (speculation,
hedging, futures, forward, contracts etc..); International trade
Agricultural Price Policy:Introduction to Agricultural Price Policy;
Characteristics of agricultural product prices; Agricultural price stabilisation
policy; Types of stabilisation policies
6
RESOURCES:
PRESCRIBED TEXTS
Department of Agriculture,( 2003). Agricultural Marketing: Small-scale farmer 
marketing series. Pretoria, RSA. 11pp.
Rae, A.N. (1994). Agricultural Management Economics: Activity and Decision 
Making. CAB. New York.
RECOMMENDED READINGS
Crawford I.M. (1997). Agricultural and Food Marketing Management. Marketing 
and Agribusiness Text 2.FAO. Rome.
Kohls, L R., and Uhl . (2002). The Marketing of Agricultural Products, Ninth 
Edition. Prentice Hall Inc, New Jersey. 
7
Agricultural Marketing
Agriculture:
Activities aimed at the use of natural resources for production of crops
& livestock for human welfare.
Growing and/or raising crops and livestock (including aquaculture).
Marketing
Philip Kotler:A human activity directed at satisfying people’s needs
and wants through exchange process.
American Marketing Association: Performance of business activities
that directs the flow of goods and services from producers to users.
8

9/11/2025
3
Evolution of Marketing Concept
The Product Concept-Consumers will favour those products that offer
the most quality, performance and features and therefore the
organization should devote its strategy to making continuous product
improvement, ,Kotler (1996).
The Selling Concept- Consumers will not buy enough of the
organization’s  product  unless  the  organization  undertakes
substantial/heavy promotion efforts.
The Marketing ConceptKey to achieve organizational goal is for the
organization to determine the needs and wants of the target market
and to adapt itself to delivering the desired satisfaction more effectively
than its competitors.
9
Agricultural Marketing
Defined as all activities involved in the supply of farm inputs to the farmers
and movement of agricultural products frompoint of production(e.g. farms)
to consumers (point of consumption).
Includes:
Analysis of consumer needs, consumer motivations, and purchasing and
consumption behaviour,
Assessment of demand and supply for farm-inputs and farm products,
Post-harvest handling of farm products,
Performance of various marketing activities (e.g. transportation,
processing, financing, warehousing/storage, grading, packaging),
Public policies and programmes relating to pricing and purchasing of farm
inputs (e.g. Affordable Farm Inputs Program) and agricultural produce
(e.g.RoleofADMARC).
10
Agricultural Marketing Utilities
Utilityrefers to the benefits (value) created through performance of
marketing activities.
Utility can be in terms ofForm, Time, Place and Possession.
Form Utility:
Through processing function, a product is changed from its raw form into a semi
or fully processed form (e.g. groundnuts/soy beans into oil, sugarcane into sugar,
cotton into cloth and wheat into flour and bread)
Processed product becomes more useful (valuable/provides more satisfaction)
than in its raw form
11
Agricultural Marketing Utilities...
Place Utility: 
Transportation function shifts products from a place of plenty (where they are
less appreciated) to a place of high demand.
Products commandhigher prices at the place of high need.
Time Utility:
Through storage marketing adds time utility to the products by making them
available at the time when they are needed.
PossessionUtility:
Buying and selling functions help to transfer ownership from one person to
another.
Products are transferred from people who value their products less to people
who place a high value in the same product.
12

9/11/2025
4
Market Demand & Supply
Demand:Quantities/amount of products that consumers are willing and able to
purchase at various possible prices during a specified period of time
Lawof Demand
There is a negative or inverse relationship between price of a product and
quantity demanded of that product,ceteris paribus(other factors remaining
constant).
Priceis a commondeterminant of demand.
OtherDeterminantsof Demand (DemandShifters)
Prices of related goods→Substitutes and Complements
Income level of consumer-Normally, high incomes lead to high demand for
certain products.
Tastes & Preferences of potential buyers/consumers (e.g. Smart phones versus
ordinary phones)
Population-Growth in populationof people creates high demand for products.
13
Demand...
Demand Schedule
Shows relationship between quantity demanded and price, all other
things being held constant.
Priceof Maize per 
Kilogram (MK)
Quantity Demanded (Kg)
100100
80130
70140
50200
14
The Demand Curve
Thedemand curveis a graph
illustrating how much of a given
product a household would be willing
to buy at different prices.
15
Supply
Quantity/amount of a product that producers (e.g. farmers) are willing
and able to make available for sale at various market prices during a
specific period.
Law of Supply
The law of supply states that supply of commodities is positively
related to the price of the commodity.
The theory reveals that producers are willing to offer more of their products
for sale at higher prices than at low prices.
16

9/11/2025
5
Supply Curve
Asupply curveis a
graphillustrating
quantities  of  goods
producers are willing
and able to offer for
sale at different prices.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
020406080100120140160
Price of Bread (MK)
Quantity of Bread (Loaves)
Supply Curve for Bread at NRC for the month of 
August 2025 
17
Determinants of Supply 
Price of Goods-As the price of product X rises while all the costs and the
prices of all goods remain unchanged, production of X becomes more
profitable.
Prices of Other Goods -If the price of some other goods, say Y, rises, with
the price of goods X remaining unchanged, some of the firms now
producing X may be attracted to move into Y production, motivated by
their search for profit.
Prices of Factors of Production-As the price of factors of production (e.g.
labour, land, fertilizer, seed) used intensively by X producers rise, costs of
production will also rise. This will cause supply of product X to fall.
State of Technology -Technological improvements (e.g. invention of new
machines or more efficient techniques of production) reduce cost of
production, and thus, increase profit margins. This promotes high
production and high supply of products on the market.
18
Expectation-Production decisions are also influenced by expected
future prices. For example, if price ofproduct Xis expected to rise,
firms may decide to produce & supply more of product X, to take
advantage of the expected high price of X.
Tastes of Producers-If producers prefercommodity Xover
commodity Y, even though profits from both products are similar,
commodity X will be supplied more than commodity Y. A change in
producer's tastein favour ofproducing a commodity will increase its
supply, while a change in tastesagainstproducing the commodity will
reduce its supply.
Government Tax and Subsidy Policy-Increased tax on a product
reduces its supply, since tax increases cost of production. Subsidies in
cost of production provide incentives to producers, with a result being
increased production.
Determinants of Supply... 
19
Market Equilibrium
Anequilibriumis the condition that
exists when quantity supplied and
quantity demanded on the market
are equal.
This equality of quantity demanded
and quantity supplied is called
Equilibrium Quantityand the price
that occurs at this balancing point is
calledEquilibrium Price or Clearing
Price
20

9/11/2025
6
If sellers/producers raise prices of
products above the equilibrium price
there will be more of the commodity
(d)offered for sale than buyers will
take(b).
Similarly if the price falls below the
equilibrium price, buyers will be
eager to buy more of a commodity
and they will tend to compete and
outbid each other thus raising the
price.
There is therefore a tendency for
market prices to move towards the
equilibrium price.
Market Equilibrium
21
Market Disequilibria: Market Surplus & Market Shortage
Marketsurplus
The market price is above equilibrium
There is excess supply which leads producers to lower prices of goods &
services
Quantity demanded increases and quantity supplied decreases
Marketshortage
The market price is below equilibrium:
There is shortage of goods and services
Producers raise prices
Quantity demanded decreases and quantity supplied increases
22
Market Disequilibria-Market Shortage
Excess Demand, orMarket
Shortage,is a condition that
exists when quantity demanded
exceeds quantity supplied at the
current price.
When  quantity  demanded
exceeds quantity supplied, price
tends to rise until equilibrium is
restored
23
Market Disequilibria-Market Surplus
Excess  Supply,  orMarket
Surplus,is the condition that
exists when quantity supplied
exceeds quantity demanded at
the current price.
When   quantity   exceeds
quantity  demanded,  price
supplied tends to fall until
equilibrium is restored.
24

9/11/2025
7
Elasticity 
Elasticity is a measure of responsiveness of one variable(e.g. quantity of
goods supplied or demanded)due to change (s) in another variable
(e.g. change in price of the goods).
The greater the elasticity, the greater the responsiveness.
Price Elasticity of Demand
According to the law of demand, whenever price of products rises, the
quantity of products demanded falls.Thus the price elasticity of demand
is always negative.
Price elasticity of demand and supply gives the exact quantity response
to a change in price.
Demand iselasticif the percentage change in quantity is greater than the
percentage change in price.E > 1 Elastic Demand means that quantity
changes by a greater percentage than the percentage changein price.
25
Elasticity...
Demand isinelasticif the percentage change in quantity is less than the
percentage change in price.E<1 Inelastic Demand means that quantity
doesn't changemuch witha changein price.
Elasticity is Unitaryif percent change in price is equal to percent change in
quantity demanded
Determinantsof Elasticity of Demand
Availabilityof Close Substitutes- Substitutability
Necessities versus Luxuries (e.g. Maize vs. Beef)
Time Horizon
26
PriceElasticity of Supply
Price elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied divided
by the percentage change in price
Supply iselasticif the percentage change in quantity isgreater thanthe
percentage change in price . Elastic supply is whenES> 1
Supply isinelasticif the percentage change in quantity isless thanthe
percentage change in price . Inelastic supply is whenES< 1
Determinantsof elasticity of supply
Time period.
If price of a commodity rises and the producers have enough time to make adjustment
in the level of output, the elasticity of supply will be more elastic.
If the time period is short and the supply cannot be expanded after a price increase, the
supply is relatively inelastic.
Ability to store output.The goods which can be safely stored have relatively
elastic supply over the goods which are perishable and do not have storage
facilities.
27
Factor mobility.If the factors of production can be easily moved from one use to
another, it will affect elasticity of supply. The higher the mobility of factors, the
greater is the elasticity of supply of the goods and vice versa.
Changes in marginal cost of production.If with expansion of output, marginal cost
increases and marginal revenue declines, the price elasticity of supply will be less
elastic(inelastic)
Excess supply.When there is excess capacity and the producer can increase output
easily to take advantage of the rising prices, the supply is more elastic. In case the
production is already up to the maximum from the existing resources, the rising prices
will not affect supply in the short period. The supply will be more inelastic.
Availability of infrastructure facilities.If infrastructure facilities are available for
expanding output of a particular good in response to the rise in prices, the elasticity
of supply will be relatively more elastic.
Agricultural or industrial products.In agriculture, time is required to increase output
in response to rise in prices of goods. The supply of agricultural goods is fairly
inelastic. Supply of manufactured consumer goods, is comparatively easy within a
short period of time.
28

9/11/2025
8
Calculation of Elasticity: Percentage Method
Price Elasticity of Demand (E
d
)= 
௉௘௥௖௘௡௧௔௚௘ ஼௛௔௡௚௘ ௜௡ ஽௘௠௔௡ௗ
௉௘௥௖௘௡௧௔௚௘ ஼௛௔௡௚௘ ௜௡ ௉௥௜௖௘
The percentage changes in the equation are calculated by dividingthe
changein quantity demanded by the original quantity demanded and
by dividing thechangein price by the original price
Disregard the negative sign. Consider only the absolute figure.
Therefore, E
d 
=1.655
29
Suppose an increase in price of beef from MK2,500/Kg to MK3,000 per Kg 
has reduced quantity demanded from 15 Kilograms to 10 Kilograms per week 
in Mudzi village. Calculate price elasticity of demand.

∆ௗ
∆௣
=
೏
మ
ష೏
భ
೏భ
೛
మ
ష೛
భ
௣
ଵ
= (10-15)/15÷(3000-2500)/2500=-0.333/0.2=-1.655
Calculation of Elasticity : Percentage Method
30
Calculation of Elasticity: Mid-Point Formula
Elasticity should & must be the same whether prices rise or fall.
Economists  use  the  averages  of  prices  and  quantities  under
consideration as reference points for determining percentage changes
in price and quantity.
This formula averages the two prices and the two quantities as the
reference points for computing the percentages
Price Elasticity of Demand:
E
d
=(Change  in  Quantity  Demanded/Average  of  Sum  of  Quantities
demanded)÷(Change in price/Average of sum of Prices)
E
d
= [Q
2
-Q
1
/ 0.5(Q
2
+Q
1
)] ÷ [P
2
-P
1
/ 0.5(P
2
+P
1
)]
31
Mid-Point Formula (Using Averages): Example
Suppose an increase in price of beef from MK2,500/Kg to MK3,000 per
Kg has reduced quantity demanded from 15 Kilograms to 10 Kilograms
per week in Mudzi village.CalculatePrice Elasticity of Demand.
E
d
= [Q
2
-Q
1
/ 0.5(Q
2
+Q
1
)]÷[P
2
-P1/0.5(P
2
+P
1
)]
E
d
= [10-15/ 0.5(10+15)]÷[3000-2500/0.5(2500+3000)]
E
d
= [-5/ 0.5(25)]÷[500/0.5(5500)]
E
d
= [-5/ 12.5)]÷[500/2750]
E
d
= [-.4]÷[.18]
E
d
= -2.2
32