

BIOLOGY  BIO 111
LILONGWE UNIVERSITY OF AGRICULTURE AND 
NATURAL RESOURCES COLLEGE (LUANAR)
NRC CAMPUS
BY M.KACHINGWE. 

CELL BIOLOGY AND MICROSCOPY
•Lecture Outline 
1.Introduction : biology defined & the hierarchy of biological 
organization  
2.Relevance of studying microscopes and a brief history of microscopy 
3.Parts and Functions of the Light microscope 
4.Principles of microscopy 
5.Types of Microscopes, their advantages and limitations  

DEFINITION(s) OF BIOLOGY
•It is the study of living organisms, divided into many specialized fields 
that cover their morphology, physiology, anatomy, behavior, origin, 
and distribution (Oxford Dictionary). 
•Biology is the natural science that studies life and living organisms, 
including their physical structure, chemical processes, molecular 
interactions, physiological mechanisms,  development and evolution 
(Wikipedia). 
•Biology is the branch of science that deals with living organisms and 
their vital processes. It encompasses diverse fields, including; botany, 
conservation biology, ecology, evolution, genetics, marine biology, 
medicine, microbiology, molecular biology, physiology and zoology. 

LEVELS OF ORGANISATION IN BIOLOGY



Microscopy-Brief History
1.ZaccharausJanssen, a lens maker -1590  
Double lens  50x to 100x
2.Galileo –1610 ‘Improved microscope’
3.Robert Hoole-1635-1703 
In 1660’s Made and used a compound  lens microscope
•Although his magnifications were high enough to reveal bacteria-No 
bacterial observations recorded
Anton Van Leeuwenhoek (1632-1723)
A merchant, not a trained scientist, self educated in glass blowing and fine metal work
Hobby in glass lens making, made minute, simple but powerful lens
Up to 300X magnification
Delighted in examining a variety of objects, saliva, pepper infusions, seminal fluid, 
urine, cow dung etc.

Microscopy-Brief History
•Observed what he called ‘Animacules’.
•Leeuwenhookmade most of his observations by light transmitted 
through the object , mostly under fluid observations
•Hooke’s observations were mostly dried samples
•1830 –Joseph Jackson Lister reduced spherical aberration or the 
"chromatic effect“: (fuzzy images & color rings)”-inequalities of 
refraction by peripheral parts of the objective lens
•showing that several weak lenses used together at certain distances gave 
good magnification without blurring the image. This was the prototype 
for the compound microscope. 

Microscopy-Brief History

Microscopy-Brief History

Microscopy-Brief History 

Parts and Functions of the light microscope 
Key terms : 
•magnification, 
•resolution, 
•refraction, 
•reflection, 
•refractive index, 
•numerical aperture, 
•contrast, 
•field of view, 
•focus, 
•immersion liquids

Parts of light microscope 

The Parts of a light Microscope 



Microscopy –Principles 
MICROSCOPY
Microscopy:Technicalfieldofusingmicroscopestoviewsamplesand
objectsthatcannotbeseenwiththeunaidedeye(objectsthatarenotwithin
theresolutionrangeofthenormaleye).
Microscopes:Instrumentsdesignedtoproducemagnifiedvisualor
photographicimagesofobjectstoosmalltobeseenwiththenakedeye.
Themicroscopeaccomplishesthreetasks:
Produceamagnifiedimageofthespecimen,
Separatethedetailsintheimage,
Renderthedetailsvisibletothehumaneyeorcamera.

Microscopy -Principles
Contrast: Ability to distinguish an object from its background-use of 
stains
Field of View: Diameter of light circle
Focus: Adjustments for a sharp/clear image by moving the objective 
lens, tube, or stage

Microscopy -Principles
Resolution:Theabilityofalenssystemtoshowfinedetailsoftheobjectbeing
observed.
FieldofView(FOV):Thediameterofthecircleoflightthatyouseewhen
lookingintoamicroscope.
Asthepowergetsgreater,thefieldofviewgetssmaller.
Canbemeasuredbyplacingaclearmetricruleronthestageandcountingthemillimetres
fromonesidetotheother.
Typicallyyouwillgetabout4.5mmat40X,1.8mmat100X,0.45mmat400Xand0.18mmat
1000X.
Focus:Ameansofmovingthespecimencloserorfurtherawayfromthe
objectivelenstorenderasharpimage.Onsomemicroscopes,thestagemoves
andonothers,thetubemoves

Parts and Functions of the light microscope
Key terms : magnification, resolution, refraction, reflection, refractive 
index, numerical aperture, contrast, field of view, focus, immersion 
liquids, 

Parts and Functions of the light microscope
•Eyepiece Lens: Lens at the top that you look 
through, different magnifications
•Tube: Eyepiece –Objective lens connection
•Arm: Supports the tube and connects it to the base 
&  for carrying the microscope 

Parts and Functions of the light microscope 
•Base: Bottom of the microscope for support
•Illuminator: A steady light source (e.g110 volts) 
•Stage: Flat platform that supports microscope slide
•Mechanical stage: Clamping device on the stage for 
holding and moving the slide around on the stage
•Stage Clips: For holding slides in place

Parts and Functions of the light microscope
•Nose Piece/ Tunnel: Holds two or more objective lenses and can 
be rotated to easily change power e.g. X 10 , X 40.
Objective Lenses
•Usually you will find 3 or 4 objective lenses on a microscope. They almost 
always consist of 4X, 10X, 40X and 100X powers. 
•Diaphragm/Iris: Used to vary the intensity and size of 
the cone of light that is projected upward into the slide.
•Coarse adjustment knob : For  focusing, It is always 
used first, and it is used only with the low power 
objective.

Parts and Functions of the light microscope
•Diaphragm: Found within the condenser, regulates the amount of 
light / light intensity that reaches the slide.
•Microscopes that lack voltage control on the light source rely entirely 
on the diaphragm for controlling light intensity.
•Course adjustment knob: Used to focus during microscopic 
observation. Used first before the fine adjustments
•Fine Adjustment: Knob used to bring the specimen into better or 
fine focus.
i.e. X100 objective lens

Microscopy-Principles
•Microscopy-Technical field of using microscopes to view samplesand 
objects too small to be seen by the un aided eye. Microscopes are 
instruments designed to produce magnified visual or photographic 
images of small objects. 
•The microscope must accomplish three tasks: 
•Produce a magnified image of the specimen
•Separate the details in the image
•Render the details visible to the human eye or camera.
•Key Concepts of microscopy are:
•Magnification
•Resolution
•Refractive Index

Microscopy -Principles 
Contrast: Ability to distinguish an object from its background-use of 
stains
Field of View: Diameter of light circle
Focus: Adjustments for a sharp/clear image by moving the objective 
lens, tube, or stage

Microscopy –Principles 
•Refraction: When a ray of light passes from one medium to another, 
it is bent at the interface.

Microscopy –Principles 
•RefractiveIndex:Ameasureofhowgreatlyasubstanceslowsthe
velocityoflight.Thedirectionandmagnitudeofbendingis
measuredbytherefractiveindexesofthetwomediaformingthe
interfacee.g.airandglass
•Itistheratioofthevelocityoflightinthefirstofthetwomedia
(e.g.air)tothatinthesecondmedia(e.g.glass)asitpassesfrom
thefirsttothesecond(airtoglass).

Microscopy –Principles 
•Resolution:Theextenttowhichanobservationalsystem
(microscopeinthiscase)candistinguishthestructuraldetailsbeing
examinede.g.differentcellorganelles.
•OrItistheabilityoflensestodistinguishfinedetail&structure,to
distinguishtwopointsaspecificdistanceaparte.g.Aresolving
powerof0.4nmcandistinguishtwopointsthatare0.4nmapart.
•OrItisitsabilitytocompletelyseparatetwoobjectsina
microscopicfield
•LimitofResolution(l):Thesmallestdistancethatmayseparatetwo
pointsonanobjectandstillpermittheirobservationasdistinct
separatepoints.

Microscopy –Principles 
•The limit of resolution for light microscopes is about 0.2μm, which 
means that 2 objects closer than 0.2μm would not be seen as two 
distinct objects. 
•Most bacterial cells are about 1μm, but difficult for their internal 
structures less than 0.2μ

Microscopy –Principles 
Resolvingpowerfromalenssystemcanbemaximizedbythe
following:
1.Placingabluefilteroverthelightsourceshortensthewavelength
ofthelightsource
2.Keepingthecondenseratthehighestposition,maximumamount
oflightentersobjectivelens,limitsamountoflightlostdueto
refraction
3.Rightadjustmentsofthediaphragm,asclosingthediaphragm
improvescontrast,italsoreducesnumericalaperture.

Microscopy -Principles 
Limit of resolution is given by the Abbe’s relationship as:
•Limit of Resolution (l)=
푾풂풗풆풍풆풏품풕풉(흀)
푵풖풎풆풓풊풄풂풍풂풑풆풓풕풖풓풆(풏풔풊풏휶)
where :
•λ (lambda) is the wavelength  of the illumination or radiation used to 
form the image
•n is the refractive index (a function of density) of the material (i.e., 
mostly air or water) between the specimen and the first lens (or objective 
lens)
•sin α is sine of the semi-angle of aperture of the first lens as viewed from 
the specimen. 
•The quantity “n sin α” is the numerical aperture (NA).

Microscopy -Principles
•NumericalApertureissimplyamathematicalexpressionthat
describeshowthecondenserlensconcentratesandfocusesthelight
raysfromthelightsource.
•Itsvalueismaximizedwhenlightraysarefocusedintoaconeoflight
thatthenpassesintothroughthespecimenintotheobjectivelens.
•Sincelightisrefractedasitpassesfromglasstoair,refractedlightrays
arelost,andthenumericalapertureisdiminished.
•Thegreaterthelossofrefractedlight,thelowerthenumerical
apertureandthisalsoreducestheresolvingpower.

Microscopy –Principles 
•Abbe’srelationshipsmakeitclearthathighresolutionina
microscopecanonlybeachievedbymanipulatingthefollowing
variables:
1.thewavelengthoftheilluminatingradiation,
2.therefractiveindex
3.theaperture.

Microscopy –Principles 
Wavelengths of different rays -electromagnetic spectrum 

Microscopy –Principles 
•ResolvingpowerisInverselyproportionaltowavelengthi.e.shorter
wavelength,higherresolution
•Refractiveindexcanbeincreasedbyusingoilstofillthespace
betweenthespecimenandtheobjectivelens.Transparent
immersionoils(i.e.,oilimmersionlens)havenuptoabout1.6.Still
1.6isbigimprovementoverairorwater(n=1).

Microscopy -Principles
•Immersionliquids(e.g.oil)canbeusedtoachievehighermagnificationwith
goodresolution
•Onewayofincreasingtheopticalresolvingpowerofthemicroscopeistouse
immersionliquidsbetweenthefrontlensoftheobjectiveandthecoverslip
•Lightpassingthroughthemediumandspecimenrefractdifferently,andcanbe
lostafterpassingthroughthestainedspecimen
•Topreservethedirectionoflightraysafterhighestmagnification,immersionoil
isplacedbetweenglassslideandoilimmersionobjectivelens



Image formation in optical microscopes 
•The optical microscope forms an image of a specimen placed on 
the stage by passing light from the illuminator through a series of 
glass lenses and focusing this light either into the eyepieces, on 
the film plane in a traditional camera system, or onto the surface 
of a digital image sensor. 
•Visible light passes through/ reflected from the sample through 
lenses to produce a magnified view of the sample.
•Resulting image viewed directly by the eye, captured digitally, 
imaged on photographic plate.
•It uses visible light as a source of light 

Microscopy -Principles
Real Image and Virtual Image
•Real Image: Formed when light rays intersect at a focal point and can 
be projected on a screen, recorded on film, or projected onto the 
surface of a sensor such as a CDplaced in the image plane 
•Virtual Image: Formed  when light rays diverge, but project imaginary 
extensions that converge to a focal point, the image is virtual and 
cannot be viewed on a screen or recorded on film.

TYPES OF MICROSCOPES
1.Thelight(optical)microscope
Compoundmicroscope
Phase‐contrastmicroscope
Dark-fieldcontrastmicroscope
Fluorescentmicroscope
2.Electronmicroscope
Transmissionelectronmicroscope(TEM)
Scanningelectronmicroscope(SEM)
3.Scanningprobemicroscope

1.Optical microscopes

Optical microscopes
Opticalorlightmicroscopyinvolvespassingvisiblelighttransmitted
throughorreflectedfromthesamplethroughasingleormultiple
lensestoallowamagnifiedviewofthesample.
Theresultingimagecanbedetecteddirectlybytheeye,imagedona
photographicplateorcaptureddigitally
Thebasiclightmicroscopeismadeupwiththefollowing;
Thesinglelenswithitsattachments,orthesystemoflensesandimaging
equipment,
Theappropriatelightingequipment
Samplestageandsupport

i.Compound microscope
Thecommonlightmicroscopeusedinthelaboratory
Becauseitcontainstwotypesoflensesthatfunctiontomagnifyan
object
Ocularthelensclosesttotheeye
Objectivethelensclosesttotheobject
Mostmicroscopeshaveontheirbaseanapparatuscalleda
condenser,whichcondenseslightraystoastrongbeam
Adiaphragmlocatedonthecondenser.Controlstheamountof
lightcomingthroughit
Bothcoarseandfineadjustmentsarefoundonthelightmicroscope

Compound microscope
Acompoundlightmicroscopeoftencontainsfourobjective
lenses
4XThescanninglens;usuallyred
10XThelow-powerlens;usuallyyellow
40XThehigh-powerlens;usuallyblue
100XTheoil-immersionlens;usuallywhite&black
Anocularlensmagnifies10times
Thetotalmagnificationspossiblewillbe40X,100X,400X,and1000X
Mostcompoundmicroscopesareparfocal.
Remainsinfocuswhenoneswitchesfromoneobjectivetothenextobjective

Resolutionofthemicroscope:theabilitytoseeclearlytwo
itemsasseparateobjectsunderthemicroscope
Itisdeterminedinpartbythewavelengthofthelightusedforobserving
Visiblelighthasawavelengthofabout550nm
Ultravioletlighthasawavelengthofabout400nmorless
Theresolutionofamicroscopeincreasesasthewavelengthdecreases
Ultravioletlightallowsonetodetectobjectsnotseenwithvisiblelight
TheResolvingPowerofalensreferstothesizeofthesmallestobjectthat
canbeseenwiththatlens
BasedonthewavelengthofthelightusedandtheNumericalAperture
ofthelens

TheNumericalAperture(NA):Thewidestconeoflightthatcan
enterthelens;TheNAisengravedonthesideoftheobjectivelens
Immersionoilisplacedbetweenthelensandtheglassslide
Toincreasetheresolutionwiththeoil-immersionlens,
Ithasthesamelight-bendingability(indexofrefraction)astheglassslide
Soitkeepslightinastraightlineasitpassesthroughtheglassslidetotheoil
andontotheglassoftheobjective,totheoil-immersionlens
Withtheincreasedamountoflightenteringtheobjective,the
resolutionoftheobjectincreases,andonecanobserveobjectsassmall
asbacteria
Resolutionisimportantinothertypesofmicroscopyaswell

Limitations of compound microscopes 
Livecellsinparticulargenerallylacksufficientcontrasttobe
studiedsuccessfully;
Internalstructuresofthecellarecolorlessandtransparent
Themostcommonwaytoincreasecontrastistostainthe
differentstructureswithselectivedyes,
Butthisinvolveskillingandfixingthesample.
Mayalsointroduceartifacts,apparentstructuraldetailsthatare
causedbytheprocessingofthespecimenandarethusnota
legitimatefeatureofthespecimen

Theselimitationshaveallbeenovercometosomeextentbyspecific
microscopytechniquesthatcannon-invasivelyincreasethecontrastof
theimage.
Thesetechniquesmakeuseofdifferencesintherefractiveindexofcell
structures.
Itiscomparabletolookingthroughaglasswindow:you(brightfield
microscopy)don'tseetheglassbutmerelythedirtontheglass.
Thereishoweveradifferenceasglassisadensermaterial,andthiscreatesa
differenceinphaseofthelightpassingthrough
Thehumaneyeisnotsensitivetothisdifferenceinphasebutcleveroptical
solutionshavebeenthoughtouttochangethisdifferenceinphaseintoa
differenceinamplitude(lightintensity).

Apartfromthecompoundmicroscope,microbiologists
useothertypesofmicroscopesforspecificpurposes
Permitviewingofobjectsnototherwiseseenwiththe
compoundlightmicroscope

ii. Dark-field Microscope
Dark-fieldMicroscope:Usedtoobservelive
spirochetes,suchasthosethatcausesyphilis
Thismicroscopecontainsaspecialcondenserthatscatters
lightandcausesittoreflectoffthespecimenatanangle
Alightobjectisseenonadarkbackground





iii. Phase-contrast Microscope
Containsspecialcondensersthatthrowlight“outof
phase”andcauseittopassthroughtheobjectatdifferent
speeds
Live,unstainedorganismsareseenclearlywiththis
microscope,andinternalcellpartssuchasmitochondria,
lysosomes,andtheGolgibodycanbeseenwiththis
instrument



iv. TheFluorescent Microscope
Usesultravioletlightasitslightsource
Whenultravioletlighthitsanobject,itexcitesthe
electronsoftheobject,andtheygiveofflightin
variousshadesofcolor
SinceUVlightisused,theresolutionoftheobject
increases
Alaboratorytechniquecalledthefluorescent-
antibodytechniqueemploysfluorescentdyesand
antibodiestohelpidentifyunknownbacteria



2. ELECTRON MICROSCOPE 
TheenergysourceusedisaBeamofelectrons
Sincethebeamhasanexceptionallyshortwavelength,itstrikesmost
objectsinitspathandincreasestheresolutionofthemicroscope
significantly
Usedtoviewvirusesandsomelargemolecules
TheelectronstravelinaVacuumtoavoidcontactwithdeflectingair
molecules,andmagnetsfocusthebeamontheobjecttobeviewed
Themicroscopeisconnectedtoamonitor
Animageiscreatedonamonitor

ELECTRON MICROSCOPE

i. Transmission Electron Microscope (TEM)
Themoretraditionalformofelectronmicroscope
Tousethisinstrument,oneplacesultrathinslicesof
microorganismsorvirusesonawiregridandthenstains
themwithgoldorpalladiumbeforeviewing
Thedenselycoatedpartsofthespecimendeflectthe
electronbeam,andbothdarkandlightareasshowupon
theimage

ii. The Scanning Electron Microscope   
(SEM)
Themorecontemporaryformelectronmicroscope
Itpermitsthree‐dimensionalviewsof
microorganismsandotherobjects
Wholeobjectsareused
And,GoldorPalladiumstainingisemployed

3. THE SCANNING PROBE MICROSCOPEs
SPMsareusedtomakeimagesofnanoscalesurfacesandstructures,
includingatoms
Theyuseaphysicalprobetoscanbackandforthoverthesurfaceofa
sample
Areconnectedtoacomputerwhichgathersdatathatareusedto
generateanimageofthesurface
Differentfromopticalmicroscopes,inSPMstheuserdoesn’t“see”the
surfacedirectly.
Instead,thetool“feels”thesurfaceandcreatesanimagetorepresent
it.





Computation of magnification
1.Estimationbyusinglensspecifications
Themagnifyingpowerofalensiscommonlyexpressedin
diameters.
Forexample,ifalensmagnifiesanobject10times,the
magnificationissaidtobe10diameters,commonlywrittensimply
“10X."
Magnificationlocation
Themagnificationfortheeyepiececanbefoundontheeyepieceitself.
Themagnificationfortheobjectivelensescanbefoundoneachobjective
lens.
Theoverallhighestmagnificationiswrittenonthesideofthebodytube

Computation of magnification
Findingtheoverallmagnification
Multiplythemagnificationoftheeyepiecebythe
magnificationoftheobjectivelensyouareusing.
Forexample,ifthemagnificationoftheeyepieceis10xand
themagnificationoftheobjectivelensis40x,theoverall
magnificationis400x

Computation of magnification
2. Estimation by direct measurement.
Explain  ......!!!!!

Steps for estimation by direct measurement  
1.Put the slide on the stage of the microscope and put it into focus 
under low power. Low power is the easiest magnification by which 
to place the object in focus. It is necessary to have the object in 
focus before accurately estimating the size under the microscope. 

. 
2. Use a ruler to measure the diameter of the field of view. Look 
through the eyepiece while measuring the diameter. 
Place one end of the ruler at the end of the field of view. Millimeters 
are a convenient unit of measurement. The diameter of the field of 
view is also often measured in micrometers. To make the calculations 
easier, you can convert the units to micrometers after. 

. 
3.  Estimate how many times the object appears over the field of view 
of the microscope. To do this, place a piece of graph paper under the 
object. Look through the eyepiece while performing this estimation, 
otherwise you will not obtain accurate results. Use the graph paper to 
determine how many squares of graph paper the object occupies. Then 
count the total number of squares across the field of view. For 
example, if the field of view contains a total of six graph paper squares, 
and the object covers a length of about two graph paper squares, then 
the object fits across the field of view at least three times. 7 

. 
4.  Divide the diameter of the field of view by the total number of times 
the object under the microscope fits across the field of view. For 
example, if you measured the diameter of the field of view to be 18 
millimeters, and the object appeared to fit across the field of view 
three times, then you would divide 18 millimeters by three. The 
resulting answer would be six millimeters. Therefore, the size of the 
object under the microscope would be approximately six millimeters. 
To convert your answer to micrometers, multiply it by 1,000 because 
there are 1,000 micrometers in one millimeter. Therefore, if your 
answer is six millimeters, your answer in micrometers would be 6,000.  



HOW TO MAKE A WET MOUNT-SLIDE

Procedure you would follow to prepare a wet 
slide to be viewed on alight microscope....
•Get a clean slide together with a cover slip from a slide box.
•Cut a piece of internal leaves of the onion bulb using a scalpel.
•Peel a thin transparent piece of the epidermal layer from the inside of an onion 
bulb.
•Carefully, put the piece of epidermal layer you have cut on the slide such that it is 
not folded.
•Place one drop of water (or a chemical stain) on the middle of the slide.
•Slowly, cover the specimen with a coverslip using forces or mounted needle. This 
needs to be done gently to prevent introducing air bubbles on the specimen.
•Finally, place the slide with the specimen on the stage of a microscope for 
viewing.

FIELD OF VIEW FOR MICROSCOPES 
•

•

. 
•

•

. 
•

.
THE END !