

1 
 
 
 
General Biology (Botany and Genetics) 
 
 
 
Biology Module 
 
Course Name: Biology 121 
 
 
Course code: BIO 121 
 
 
 
 
Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
 
 
 
 
 
 

2 
 
Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
 
 
 
Biology 121 Module 
 
 
 
Course code: BIO 121 
 
 
Module Authors:  
Mattrina Mpeketula Soko 
W.A.B Msuku 
Thomson Sanudi 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

3 
 
Acknowledgement 
The module authors gratefully acknowledge the support from ODL team at LUANAR 
who  were  instrumental  in  the  completing  this  Open  Distance Learning  material. We 
are also thankful to Dr. Ndalapa Mhango for offering preliminary checking so that the 
material meets ODL language format. This module was developed and produced by 
LUANAR  with  the  assistance  of  World  Bank  and  their  contributions  are  gratefully 
acknowledged.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

4 
 
Unit 1: Introduction to Botany 
 
Introduction 
 
As you may be aware by now that the field of biology is divided into several branches 
based on the subject of study. In Biology module 1, you covered microbiology (study 
of  microorganisms)  and  zoology  (study  of  animals).  In  this  module  you  will  be 
introduced to other two branches of biology which are botany (the study of plants) and 
genetics (the study of heredity). 
 
 Unit 1 learning objectives 
By the end of this Unit, you should be able to: 
a)  
 
 
Unit 1 key terms 
Bryophyta 
Pteridophyta 
Angiosperms 
Gymnosperms 
Tracheids 
Gametangia 
Sporogenous 
Autotrophs 
Sporophyte 
Gametophyte 
Alternation of generations 
Archeoplastids 
Strobili 
Thalloid 
Resin 
Needle 

5 
 
 
Unit 1 content 
 
1.0 Plant systematics 
There are about 1.8 million species of organisms and several millions more remain 
to  be  discovered.  To  study  these species,  a  system  for  organizing,  naming  and 
classifying  them  is  essential. The  field  of  biology  that  deals  with the  diversity  of 
living  organisms  and  their  evolutionary  relationships is  called systematics. 
Taxonomy is  the branch  of science  of dealing  with  the naming,  describing  and 
classifying of organisms. On the other hand, classification refers to the branch of 
science  involving grouping of organisms  based  on  their  evolutionary  similarities 
and differences. Carolus Linnaeus devised the binomial nomenclature of naming 
organisms which uses the genus and the species. The genus name always starts 
with a capital letter followed by the species name which always starts with a small 
letter. In printed form the scientific name is presented in italics and when it is hand 
written the genus and the species names must always be underlined separately. 
 
There  are  eight levels  of  classification  which  are  hierarchical  (from  highest  to 
lowest). These levels are Domain, Kingdom, Phylum, Class, Order, Family, Genus, 
and Species. 
 
Domain refers to the broadest taxonomic category or group to which a living thing 
belongs;  each domain  includes  one  or  more  kingdoms.  As  you  may  recall  from 
module 1, the three domain system consists of Archea (prokaryotic), Eubacteria 
(prokaryotic)  and  Eukaryote  (eukaryotic).  There  are  five  kingdoms  to  which  all 
organisms  belong  under  these  three  domains.  These  kingdoms  are  Kingdom 

6 
 
Monera,  Kingdom Protista,  Kingdom Fungi,  Kingdom Plantae and  Kingdom 
Animalia.  
 
1.1 Kingdom Plantae 
The Kingdom plantae is also called as Kingdom Metaphyta. It includes all types 
of    eukaryotic,    multicellular,    photosynthetic    and    autotrophic    plants    with 
differentiated  tissues  and  organs.  Most  of  the  organisms  in  this  kingdom  are 
autotrophs, which synthesize their own food with the help of solar energy through 
photosynthesis. However, there are a few species, which are both autotrophs and 
heterotrophs. 
 
The history of life on earth and the success of many organisms literally depend on 
the  success  of  plants.  The  Kingdom  Plantae  contains  about  300,000  different 
species. Among the five kingdoms, Kingdom plantae is very important, as they are 
the  source  of  food  for  all  other  living  creatures  present  on  planet  earth,  which 
depends on plants to survive. 
 
Plants  evolved  from  aquatic  green  algal  ancestors  known  as charophytes or 
stoneworts. Land plants are collectively classified as archaeplastids. Adaptations 
to life on land that have evolved in plants include a waxy cuticle to prevent water 
loss  or  desiccation;  multicellular  gametangia:  (organs  that  protect  developing 
reproductive parts); stomata (tiny openings in the leaves and stems for gaseous 
exchange); and for most plants, vascular tissues mostly the xylem and phloem for 
transportation  of  nutrients and  water  throughout  the  plant. Plants  undergo  an 
alternation  of  generations  between  multicellular  gametophyte  and  sporophyte 
generations. 
 
 

7 
 
 
 
 
1.3 Characteristics and adaptations of plants 
Besides the diversity of plants, plants share several characteristics. We will now 
list the main characteristics that are shared among most plants. Most plants: - 
a. are multicellular eukaryotic organisms with differentiated tissues and organs. 
b. have cell walls made of cellulose.  
c. have cells which frequently contain large vacuole and photosynthetic pigments 
in plastids. 
d. have photosynthetic pigments are chlorophylls a and b. 
e. are nonmotile. 
f. reproduce both asexually and sexually, with alternation of gametophyte (n) and 
sporophyte (2n) generations. 
 
1.4 Adaptation of plants  
Here we will discuss the general adaptations of plants for life on land. Life as we 
know  today  started  in  water  and  evolved  to  terrestrial  environments.  Terrestrial 
plants had to attain the following adaptations. 
 Plants  have  a  waxy  cuticle  that  covers  the  aerial  portion  and  prevents 
desiccation or drying out due to evaporation 
 They  have  tiny  openings  called  stomata  on  the  leaves  and  stems  which 
facilitate gaseous exchange 
 They have multicellular sex organs (gametangia) with an outer layer of sterile 
cells that surrounds and protects the delicate gametes (eggs and sperm cells). 
The  fertilized  egg  develops  into  an  embryo  within  the  gametangium  which 

8 
 
offers protection during development. This is not the case in algae where eggs 
develop  away  from  the  ganetongium  and  in  some  algae,  the  gametes  are 
released before fertilization. 
 
 
1.5 The plant life cycles and alternation of generations  
Plants  have  two  distinctive  life  cycles  namely  gametophyte  generation  and 
sporophyte generation. These two phases alternate where by the plants spend the 
first part of their life cycle in a multicellular haploid stage and second part of their 
life cycle in a multicellular diploid stage. 
 
Gametophyte generation: This is the haploid portion which gives rise to haploid 
gametes by mitosis. 
 
Sporophyte generation: This is the diploid portion of the life cycle which begins 
when   two   gametes   formed   during   the   gametophyte   generation   fuse.   The 
sporophyte  generation  produces  haploid  spores  by  meiosis.  These  spores 
represent the first stage in gametophyte generation. 
 
This  change  during  the  life  cycle  from  gametophyte  generation  to  sporophyte 
generation is called alternation of generations. 
 
During  alternation  of  generations,  the  haploid  gametophytes  produce  male 
gametangia known as Antheridia (singular antheridium) in which sperm cells form 
and  female  gametangia  known  as  archegonia  (singular  archegonium).  Each 
archegonium contains a single egg which is fertilized by a single sperm upon being 
reached and forms a zygote.  

9 
 
 
The  formation  of  the  diploid  zygote  marks  the  beginning  of  a  sporophyte 
generation.  The  formed  zygote  undergoes  mitotic  cellular  division  and  develops 
into a multicellular embryo which forms a young sporophyte plant which grows into 
a mature sporophyte plant. The mature sporophyte has sporogenous cells which 
are spore producing cells or spore mother cells which divide by meiosis to produce 
haploid spores. 
 
This can be summarized as follows: 
 
        Fertilisation of female sex cell by male sex cell 
Zygote 
Embryo 
Mature sporophyte plant   Mature gametophyte plant 
Sporogenous cells    Arhegonis (female sex cell)/  
Meiosis     Antheridia (male sex cell) 
Spores 
 
Gametophyte produces gametes (eggs/sperms) by mitosis, two haploid gametes 
fuse to form a zygote, the zygote develops by mitosis into the sporophyte, special 
cells of the sporophyte undergo meiosis to form spores and each spore has the 
potential to undergo mitosis and develop into a gametophyte 
 
The figure below shows the two distinct generations of the basic plant.  

10 
 
 
Figure 1.1: The basic plant life cycle 
1.6  Classification of plants 
Plants  are  divided  into  four  main  groups  based  on  reproduction  and  vascular 
tissues. The vascular tissues and reproduction cycle are mainly considered in plant 
classification  due  to  the  significant  roles  that  they  play.  For Instance  vascular 
tissues  (the  xylem  and  the  phloem)  play  a  vital  role  in  transporting  substances 
(water, minerals and sugars) throughout the plant while seeds contain an embryo 
that helps in storing food which is used during germination. The four major groups 
of   plants are   Bryophytes,   Seedless   vascular   plants,   Gymnosprems   and 
Agniosperms which are seeded vascular plants. 
 
The  plant  kingdom  is  made  up  of  10  phyla  namely:  Phylum Bryophyta,  Phylum 
Hepatophyta,     Phylum     Anthocerophyta,     Phylum     Pteridophyta,     Phylum 
Lycopodiophyta,     Phylum     Coniferophyta,     Phylum     cycadophyta,     Phylum 
Ginkgophyta,  Phylum  Gnetophyta,  and  Phylum  Anthrophyta or  Angiosperms. 
However,  the  focus  of  this  module  is  on  the  four  main  phyla: Bryophyta, 
Pteridophyta, Angiosperms and Gymnosperms. 

11 
 
 
 
1.6.1 Bryophyta 
Bryophyta comes from the Greek words bryon meaning moss and phyton meaning 
plant.  It  includes the  lichens,  mosses,  algae  and  the  fungi.  Bryophytes  are  the 
simplest  and  the  most  primitive  of  the  land  plants.  They  are  believed  to  be  the 
earliest  plant  to  colonize  terrestrial  habitat  from  aquatic  environment  They  are 
small nonvascular plants that lack a specialized vascular, or conducting system to 
transport nutrients, water, and essential minerals (inorganic nutrients) throughout 
the plant body. Their adaptation to a terrestrial mode of life is partial as water is 
indispensable in one stage or another in their life cycle. Hence, they are also known 
as  the  amphibians  of  the  plant  kingdom.  They  do  not  form  true  roots,  stems,  or 
leaves. Instead  of using  the  vascular  tissues  for  transportation,  these  plants 
depend  mainly  on  osmosis  and  diffusion.  Due  to  this  utilization  of  osmosis  and 
diffusion for nutrient transportation, bryophytes do not grow as other higher plants.  
Bryophytes  have  a  restricted growth  since  some  of  their  cells  cannot  obtain 
sufficient necessary materials if they are to grow much larger. These plants occur 
more commonly during rainy seasons and also in humid areas. 
 
The Bryophytes are nonvascular plants with a dominant gametophyte generation. 
They are further divided into three distinct phyla which differ in many ways and in 
terms  of  evolutionary  relatedness they  may or  may  not be  closely  related.  They 
are grouped together because they lack vascular tissues and they have similar life 
cycles.  Bryophtes  are  grouped  into  three  phyla  names; Phylum  Bryophyta 

12 
 
(mosses), Phylum   Hepatophyta   (liverworts) and Phylum   Anthocerophyta 
(hornworts 
 
The life cycle of bryophytes consists of two distinct phases. These phases are the 
gametophytic  phase and  sporophytic  phases  which  alternate  with  each  other  a 
process  called  alternation  of  generations.    For  reproduction  they  reproduce  and 
disperse through haploid spores. Their life cycle consists of a marked alternation 
of generations with dominant gametophyte generation.  
 
1. Gametophytic  phase:  It  is  the  main  phase  which  is  haploid,  autotrophic, 
gamete formative (male and female) and is responsible for sexual reproduction. 
The  gametophytes  generally  form  dense  green  mats  consisting  of  individual 
plants 
 
 
 
2. Sporophytic   phase:   It   is   diploid,   heterotrophic,   spore   formative   and 
responsible for the asexual reproduction. Vegetative reproduction takes place 
through   fragmented   tubers   adventitious   branches   and   gemmae.   Sexual 
reproduction takes place by sex organs antheridium (male) and archegonium 
(female). 
 
Fertilization takes place in the presence pf water. After fertilization, a zygote is 
formed which undergoes divisions to form an embryo. The figure below shows 
the life cycle of mosses as an example of bryophytes 

13 
 
 
Figure 1.2: The life cycle of moses. 
 
1.6.2  Pteridophyta 
These  are  seedless vascular  plants.  Evolutionarily,  they  are  the  first  terrestrial 
plants  to  possess  vascular  tissues – xylem  and  phloem.  The  pteridophytes  are 
normally found in swamps, marshes, stream banks, and tropical rain forests. Some 
may grow in fields, crevices on cliffs or mountains.  
 
The life cycle of pteridophytes has clearaly defined alternation of generations just 
as in bryophytes. You may recall that in bryophytes the dominant phase in the life 
cycle  is  the  gametophytic  plant  body.  However,  in  pteridophytes,  the main  plant 
body is a sporophyte which is differentiated into true root, stem and leaves. These 
organs possess well-differentiated vascular tissues. The leaves in pteridophyta are 
small (microphylls) as in ferns. The sporophyte has a horizontal underground stem 
(rhizome)  that  bears  leaves  known  as fronds. Spore  production  occurs  in  the 
fronds where sporangia developes. Most species bear the spores in clusters called 

14 
 
sori  (singular  sorus).  In  the  sporangia,  sporagenous  cells  /  spore  mother  cells 
under-go meiosis to form haploid spores. The sporangia burst open and release 
spores  that  may  germinate  and  develop  into  gametophytes.    A  mature  fern 
gametophyte is a tiny heart shaped structure that grows against the ground called 
a prothallus (plural prothalli). The prothallus lacks vascular tissues, it only has tiny 
hair   like   absorptive   rhizoids   for   anchorage.   The   prothallus   produces   both 
archegonia  and  antheridia  on  its  underside.  A  single  egg  is  contained  in  each 
archegonia while numerous sperm cells are produced in each antheridium.  
 
The  sporophytes  bear  sporangia  that  are  held  by  leaf-like  appendages  called 
sporophylls.  In  some  cases  sporophylls  may  form  distinct  compact  structures 
called strobili or cones.  
 
The  sporangia  produce  spores  by  meiosis  in  spore  mother  cells.  The  spores 
germinate   to   give   rise   to   very   small   but   multicellular   free-living,   mostly 
photosynthetic thalloid gametophytes  called prothallus  (free  living  haploid 
gametophyte). These gametophytes require cool, damp, shady places to grow. 
Because  of  this  specific  restricted  requirement  and  the  need  for  water  for 
fertilization,  the  spread  of  pteridophytes  is  limited  and  restricted  to  narrow 
geographical regions. The gametophytes bear male and female sex organs called 
antheridia and archegonia, respectively just as in bryophytes. 
 
Water is required for transfer of antherozoids – the male gametes released from 
the antheridia, to the mouth of archegonium. Fusion of a male gamete with the 
egg  present  in  the  archegonium  result  in  the  formation  of  a  diploid  zygote  that 
grows  into  a  multicellular  embryo.  This  multicellular  embryo  is  an  immature 
sporophyte   which   is   attached   to   the   gametophyte and   depends   on   the 
gametophyte.  As  the  embryo  matures,  the  prothallus  withers  and  dies  and  the 
prothallus becomes free living. Thus the pteridophyte life cycle alternates between 

15 
 
the dominant sporophyte and which jas rhizome, roots, and fronds and the haploid 
gametophyte   (prothallus).The   sporophyte   generation   is   dominant   over   the 
gametophyte  generation  not  only  because  it  is  large  than  the  gametophyte  but 
because   it   also   persists   over   extended   periods.   A   good   example   of   the 
pteridophytes   are   the   ferns   whose   sporophytes   are   perennials   while   the 
gametopytes die soon after reproducing.  
 
In summary the pteridophytes 
 Are  seedless  vascular  plants,  which  contain  vascular  tissues  but  do  not 
produce seeds.  
 Have their reproduction process carried out by spores 
 Have  a  life  cycle  that  alternates  between  the  gametophyte  and  sporophyte 
whereby the sporophyte dominates 
 Some pteridophytes e.g. ferns and club mosses are heterosporous : produce 
two types of spores  which are microspores and mega spores unlike bryophytes 
which are monosporous- producing only one type of spores  
 
 
 
 
 
 
The figure below shows the life cycle of n example of a pteridophyte, the fern. 
 

16 
 
 
Figure 1.3: A typical life cycle of a pteridophyte 
 
 
Figure 1.4: The basic life cycle of heterosporous plants 
 

17 
 
Summary 
1. Sporophyte  plant  produces  sporangia  in  conelike  strobilus  containing 
microsporangia and megasporangia. Microsprongia produce 
microsporocytes  /  mother  spore  cells  which  undergo  meiosis  to  form 
microscopic haploid microspores. 
2. Microspores  develop  into  male  gametophyte  that  produces  sperm  cells 
within antheridia 
3. Megasporangia  undergoes  meiosis  to  form  haploid  megaspores  that 
develop into female gametophyte to produce eggs in archegonia  
4. Fertilization occurs followed by development of new sporophyte. 
 
1.6.3 Gymnosperms 
The gymnosperms are classified imto four phyla:coniferophyta, commonoy called 
conifers;  Ginkgophyta,Cycadophyta  and  Gnetophyta.  The  conifers  are  the  most 
familiar group of gymnosperms and they consist of pines, spruces, hemlocks and 
firs. The conifers are woody plants that produce seed in cones. 
 
Characteristics of conifers 
 Conifers’ wood has tracheids which are long tapering cells with pits through 
which water and dissolved minerals move from one cell to the other.  
 They produce a viscous clear or translucent substance called resin; consisting 
of several organic compounds which protects the plant from insect and fungi 
attack. 
 They have long, narrow, tough, and leathery leaves called needles.     
 Most conifers are evergreen, apart from a very few that are deciduous shed 
their needles at the end f he growing season. 

18 
 
 Most  conifers  are monoecious,  they  have  separate  male  and  female 
reproductive parts in different locations on the same plant.  
Gymnosperms  are  non-flowering  plants  with  undeveloped  seeds,  which  are 
present in an enclosed structure. In other terms they are plants in which the ovules 
are  not  enclosed  by  any  ovary  wall  and  remain  exposed  before  and  after 
fertilization.  They  produce  naked  seeds.  The  gymnosperms  are  heterosporous; 
producing  haploid  microspores  and  megaspores.  The  two  kinds  of  spores  are 
produced  within  sporangia  that  are  borne  on  sporophylls  which  are  arranged 
spirally along an axis to form lax or compact strobili or cones. The strobili bearing 
microsporophylls  and  microsporangia  are  called microsporangiate or male 
strobili. The microspores develop into a male gametophytic generation which is 
highly  reduced  and  is  confined  to  only  a  limited  number  of  cells.  This  reduced 
gametophyte  is  called  a pollen  grain.  The  development  of  pollen  grains  takes 
place within the microsporangia. The cones bearing megasporophylls with ovules 
or megasporangia are called macrosporangiate or female strobili. The male or 
female cones or strobili may be borne on the same plant (trees). However in some 
cases male cones and megasporophylls are borne on different plants (trees). 
 
Unlike  bryophytes  and  pteridophytes,  in  gymnosperms  the  male  and  the female 
gametophytes  do  not  have  an  independent  free-living  existence.  They  remain 
within the sporangia retained on the sporophytes. The pollen grain is released from 
the microsporangium. They are carried in air currents and come in contact with the 
opening of the ovules borne on megasporophylls. The pollen tube that carries the 
male  gametes  grows  towards  archegonia  in  the  ovules  and  discharge  their 
contents near the mouth of the archegonia. Following fertilization, a diploid zygote 
develops into an embryo and the ovules into seeds. These seeds are not covered. 
 
1 Monocot begins with a single seed-leaf.  The main veins of their leaves are 
usually parallel and unbranched.  

19 
 
2 Monocot plays an important role in providing us with our primary sources of 
nutrition, which includes grains, fruits, etc. 
1.6.4 Angiosperms 
These are flowering plants, which develop the seeds within a protective structure. 
They  are  the  most  diverse  phylum  of  plants  that  form  flowers  for  sexual 
reproduction and they produce seeds enclosed in fruits. There are two main types 
of angiosperms: monocots and eudicots/ dicot  
Main characteristics of Angiosperms 
 They develop their seeds within an ovary, which itself is embedded in a flower. 
After the stage of fertilization, the flower falls and the ovary bulges to become 
a fruit. 
 Angiosperms   in   the   class   Dicotyledoneae   grows   into   two   seed-leaves 
(cotyledons). 
 An angiosperms leaf consists of a single, branched, main vein, which originates 
from the base of the leaf blade. In few plats, it may also consist of four or more 
main veins diverging from the same base. 
 
Unit 1 activity 
 
 
 
Unit 1 summary 
 
 

20 
 
 
Unit 1 test 
Unit 2: Morphology and Anatomy of Flowering Plants 
 
Introduction 
Naturally, all flowering also known as seed plants develop from a seed. The seed is the 
seat of partial development of the new sporophyte, the embryo and it thus plays a major 
role in providing the continuity between successive generations of the plants.  Given the 
right environmental factors which include moisture, temperature, nutrients and light the 
seed  will  germinate. This  becomes possible after a more  or  less prolonged dormancy 
caused  by  various  internal  factors  such  as  rudimentary  or  physiologically  immature 
embryos,  mechanically  resistant  or  impermeable  seed  coats,  or  the  presence  of 
germination inhibitors. 
 
Germination is essentially a resumption of embryo growth after imbibition of water. During 
imbibition, the water content of the seed rises, usually fast at first, then slower, and the 
embryonic tissue becomes metabolically active. Enzymes already present are activated 
and new proteins with specific enzymatic activities are synthesized for the digestion and 
utilization of the different kinds of stored materials. Cell extension and cell divisions are 
initiated  and  proceed  according  to  the  programmed  pattern.  This  growth  requires 
continuous supply of water and nutrients. Before the embryo becomes a self-supporting 
seedling it utilizes the food stored in the endosperm and/or the embryo itself. 
 
Seedling growth leads to the development of three major vegetative organs, i.e. roots, 
stem and leaf. Depending on the type of plants, time taken to grow into a full mature plant 

21 
 
will vary. At maturity, these plants produce flowers (reproductive organs) which lead to 
the development of fruits and seeds. 
 
In this unit, we are going to study different morphological and anatomical structures of 
these organs of the plants. You will also be introduced to the important roles, variations 
and similarities of these organs. 
 Unit 2 learning outcomes 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:  
1. State the primary functions and types of roots, stems, leaves and flowers. 
2. Describe the external and internal parts of mature primary root, stems, leaves 
and flowers. 
3. Compare morphological and anatomical structures of monocotyledonous and 
dicotyledonous stems and leaves. 
 
 Unit 2 key terms 
Sporophyte 
Dormancy 
Imbibition 
Enzymes 
Endosperm 
Androecium 
Herbaceous 
Differentiation 
Coalescence 
Inflorescence 
Gymnoecium 
Vegetative organs 
Reproductive organs 
Morphology 
Anatomy 

22 
 
 Unit 2 Content 
2.1  Roots 
 
2.1.1 Functions of roots 
In this section we will discuss the four major and primary functions of roots. You 
may have noticed that some plants might use roots for other specialized functions. 
Among major functions of the roots include anchorage, absorption, transportation, 
and translocation. Specialized functions include storage, propagation, respiration, 
balancing  and  support,  growth,  parasitism,  and  association  with  other  living 
organisms. We  will  begin  our  discussion  by  looking  at  the  main  function  of  the 
roots. 
 
Anchorage 
This  should  be  familiar  to  most  of  us  that  roots  anchor  trees  firmly  into  the  soil, 
usually through an extensive branching network that constitutes about one third of 
the total dry weight of the plant. The roots of most plants do not extend more than 
3 to 5 meters down into the earth; those of many herbaceous species are confined 
to the upper 0.6 to 0.9 meters. Some plants form very shallow root systems, but 
these systems still effectively anchor the plants with a densely branching mass of 
roots radiating out in all directions as far as 15 meters from the stem. 
 
Absorption 
You may also be familiar that roots absorb water and minerals in solution mostly 
through feeder roots found in the soil.  
 
 

23 
 
Transportation 
After absorbing the water and mineral salts from the soil roots are also responsible 
for transporting these materials through stems to the leaves by the use of vascular 
bundles laid in a form of continuous pipes forming a body known as xylem. This 
is a one way direction process from roots to leaves (Figure 1A). 
 
 
Figure 2.1: Transportation of water, one way direction through xylem pipes (A), 
and translocation of manufactured food, multidirectional process through phloem 
pipes (B). 
 
Translocation 
Food manufactured  in  the  leaves  is  supposed  to  be  transported  to  plant  parts 
where it is required. As in the transportation of water, there are also specialized 
pipes  that  are  laid  through  the  plant  body  stretching  from  roots  to  leaves.  Such 
pipes are known as phloem. Manufactured food is able to be moved from leaves 
to  roots  and  back  from  roots  to  upper  parts  of  the  plant  where  it  is  required. 
Manufactured food can also be moved sideways through the root and stem bodies 
to wherever it is required, hence the process is multidirectional (Figure 2B). 
 

24 
 
2.1.2 Types of root systems 
Based on the origin, position, function and morphological appearance of the root, 
roots  can  be  grouped  into  three  major  groups of taproot,  adventitious or  fibrous 
and modified or specialized root systems. Let us now describe these root systems. 
 
Tap root system 
This  is  characterized  by  one  large  primary  root  (taproot)  and  smaller  roots  with 
varying  sizes  called  secondary  roots  which  originate  from  the  primary  root.  The 
taproot originates from the embryonic root called radicle (Figure 2) and continues 
to form the root systems of many dicotyledonous plants for example bean, mango, 
orange, gmalina, and gymnosperms for example pines. 
  
Figure 2.2: Development of taproot system from embryonic radicle (A, B, C, D) 
 
Adventitious or fibrous root system 
On the other hand you will notice that roots of monocotyledonous plants such as 
maize,  rice,  wheat,  grasses  and  bamboos  and  dicotyledonous  plants  that  are 
planted  from  stems for  example cassava,  sugarcane  and  sweet  potatoes  form 
adventitious systems. 

25 
 
In the monocotyledons the tap root commonly lives for a relatively short time and 
the root system is formed by roots arising directly from the shoot (stem and leaves) 
often in connection with axillary buds. Adventitious root system usually has many 
uniform or homogenous roots and in appearance, they tend to look like a broom 
or a mop. Such a fibrous broom structures is the origin of its name as fibrous root 
system (Figure 3). 
 
Figure 2.3: Adventitious or fibrous root system 
 
Modified or specialized root systems 
As  mentioned earlier,  most  plants  produce  either adventitious  or  fibrous  root 
system, taproot system or more commonly combinations of the two types. Some 
plants,  however have  roots  with  modifications  that  adapt  them  for  performing 
specific functions apart from the four basic functions. Some of the examples of the 
modified root systems are given in Table 1 below. 
 
 
 

26 
 
Table 1: Examples of modified roots 
Modified/specialized root Examples 
1. Freshy roots (Food and water 
storage roots) 
Cassava, sweet potatoes, yams, and 
some members of pumpkin and 
plantain familes. 
2. Propagative roots – many plants 
produce adventitious buds (buds not 
appearing from the stem but other 
organs of the plant ie roots growing 
along the surface and leaves which 
will lead to production of a new plant. 
Adventitious roots of ricepaper plants 
(Tetrapanax papyrifera), Horseradish 
(Roroppa armoracia), roots of cherries, 
apples, pears and other fruit trees often 
produce suckers. 
3. Aerial roots  
a. Includes respiratory or 
pneumatophores used for gas 
exchange in plants growing in 
swampy environments. 
b.  prop roots are roots developing 
from stems to provide extra 
support 
 
Black mangrove (Avicennia nitida), 
yellow water weed (Ludwigia repens) 
 
-maize and other grasses, fig trees 
(Ficus sp) 
4.   Association with other living 
organisms 
a.   mycorrhizae: plant roots 
associated with fungi for mutual 
symbiotic purposes. 
 
b. nodules in leguminous roots: 
mutualistic symbiotic association 
between roots and bacteria 
 
c. parasitic association: an 
association where roots of crops 
or trees are associated with roots 
of plant parasitic plants. 
 
-roots of most forest trees and grasses 
 
 
 
-all roots of leguminous plants 
 
 
-witchweed (Striga sp), Dodders, 
orchids. 
 
2.1.3 Root structure 
You will appreciate that the root has different internal and external structures that 
makes the root to perform the different functions. As the roots elongates, it displays 
varying morphological and anatomical structural features. From the growing tip to 
the mature part of the root, we observe six different structural regions (Figure 4). 

27 
 
Such   regions   include   root   cap,   apical   meristem   zone,   elongation   zone, 
differentiation  zone,  root  hair  zone  and  mature  root  zone.  These  are  discussed 
below in relation to their type of cells and functions. 
 
Root tip 
 
The root tip is the growing point of the root. As the name suggests this is found at 
the tip of the root. Within the root tip you will find the root cap, the apical meristem, 
the elongation zone and the region of cell differentiation.  
 
Root cap 
The root cap is composed of parenchyma cells that produce and exude mucus-
like  substance.  This  substance  is  smeared outside  the  root  cap  and  acts  as 
lubricating oil as the root pushes through the soil particles. As you will notice, the 
root cap protects the apical meristem. The root cap also assists the growing root 
as it penetrates the soil. 
 
 
Figure 2.4: Internal and external structure of a root 
28 

28 
 
Apical meristem zone 
The  apical  meristem  is  a zone  is  made  up  of  young  and  undifferentiated  cells 
(meristems).  These cells  are  randomly  arranged.  The meristems  are capable  of 
dividing mitotically increasing the numbers in a limited area hence pushing the root 
tip forward (growing). 
 
Elongation zone 
In  the  elongation  zone,  cells  start  elongating  and  increase  in  size.  As  the  cells 
elongate they arrange themselves in chains 
 
Differentiation zone 
In  this  zone  cells  begin  to  differentiate  into  different  tissue.  The  cells  begin  by 
forming  primary  tissues  for both  structural  and functional  use. The  first  primary 
tissues  include dermal  tissue  (epidermis),  ground  tissue  (cortex) and  vascular 
tissue  (xylem,  phloem  and  pericycle) (Figure  4).  The  outermost  cells  arrange 
themselves  into  a  skin  like  structure  called dermal  tissue (epidermis) while  the 
innermost cells organise themselves into translocating and transporting structures 
called vascular  tissues. The  vascular  tissue  forms  a  solid  vascular  cylinder,  or 
pith is present then a hollow cylinder with a few parenchyma and sclerenchyma 
cells embedded in them for support. The cells between the dermal and the vascular 
tissue  form  ground  tissues  made  of three major  zones  that  is  hypodermis  or 
exodermis, loose cortex and endodermis. 
 
Root hair zone 
In  young  roots  the  epidermis  is  specialized  as  an  absorbing  tissue  and  usually 
bears  root  hairs  which  are  tubular  extensions  of  the  epidermal  cells.  Root  hairs 
markedly extend the absorbing surface of the root. Root hairs have short life; they 
disintegrate in the older epidermal cells as they reach mature stage. 

29 
 
Mature root zone 
In this region you will find fully grown up cells that make the mature body of the 
root are well separated and differentiated in readiness for their different functions 
they have to undertake in the root. They are seen to be grouped into three main 
groups  (Figure 5).  The  peripheral  is  made  up  of  dermal  tissue  which  acts  as  a 
protective skin for the root. The central part of the body is taken up by a cylindrical 
shaped vascular tissues that are meant to transport water and mineral salts and 
translocate  manufactured  food.  The  area  between  the  two  is  formed  by  cells 
grouped  as  ground  tissues. Their  functions  are  many,  among  them  include 
storage, support and in aiding transportation and translocation. 
 
Figure 2.5: Cross section of a mature root 
 
Dermal tissue 
Epidermis is the outermost one cell layer body which acts as a protective skin of 
the root. At this stage, you will notice that most cells have lost their root hairs and 
seen to be forming a very tightly held layer to prevent entry of water and other large 
molecules from the soil. The layer is composed of epidermal cells of varying sizes. 

30 
 
Ground tissues 
Ground tissue is a group of tissues that occupy the middle section of the body of 
a mature root. The ground tissue is mostly composed of parenchyma cells but they 
could  also  have  collenchyma  cells.  The  tissue  is characterised with large 
intercellular spaces (lacunae) formed by aerenchyma cells. Aerenchyma cells are 
highly  vacuolated  and  may  contain plastids  are  devoid  of  chlorophyll.  They 
however as act storage for large amounts of starch. 
 
The innermost layer of the ground tissue is differentiated into one cell layer called 
endodermis. The outermost layer close to the dermal tissue (epidermis) is made 
up  of  one  or  more  cell  layers  called exodermis.  The  large  layer  between 
exodermis and endodermis is composed of loosely packed cells which usually are 
referred to as loose cortex. 
 
Cells  that  form  the  endodermis  have  their  cell  walls  coated  with  a  waterproof 
substance called suberin. This substance goes round the cells within the radial 
and  transversal  wall  forming  a  band-like  region.    However,  the  band  does  not 
completely cover all cells. A few cells are left free allowing direct openings between 
cortex and the vascular tissues. It is through these openings that water and soil 
solutions  find  their  way  into  the  vascular  tissues.  The  band  is  called casparian 
strip.  This  band  is  important  in  the  transportation  of  water  and  soil  solutions 
between cortex and vascular tissues, where water enters the vascular tissue pipes 
through pressure and with the same pressure water and soil solutions are taken 
up to the leaves. 
 
 
 
 

31 
 
Vascular tissue  
Let us now finish our discussion of the root by looking at the vascular tissue. The 
vascular tissue form a cylinder-like body of the innermost part of the mature root 
(vascular cylinder). This cylinder has three main parts namely pericycle, xylem and 
phloem. We will discuss the composition, positions and functions of each of these 
parts below. 
 
Pericycle  
The  pericycle  is  a  one  celled  layer.  The  cells  are either  Parenchymatous  or 
sclerenchymatous.  The  pericycle  acts  as  a  source  for  lateral  (secondary)  roots, 
vascular cambium and cork cambium (phellogen). 
 
Xylem 
The xylem forms a solid core with ridge like projections called archs. The number 
of archs varies in different species. Among roots of the same plants and in relation 
to this variation the roots are called Diarch with two projections, Triarch with three 
projections, Tetrarch with  four  projections or Polyarch if  the  root  has many 
projections. 
 
In  general  roots  of  dicotyledonous  plants  have  2,  3,  or  4  archs  (poles)  and  in 
monocotyledonous plants they may have many archs. 
Xylem pipes with varying sizes form a continuous pipe system from roots through 
stems to the leaves. These pipes are responsible for the transportation of water 
and mineral salts from roots to the leaves. 
 
 
 

32 
 
Phloem 
Phloem  pipes  are  grouped  into  bundles  between  the  xylem  archs.  Like  in  the 
xylem, these pipes also form a continuous system stretching from roots to leaves. 
Their major function is to translocate or conduct manufactured food from leaves 
throughout the plant body.  
 
2.2 Stems 
 
2.2.1 Functions of stems 
We will begin by learning the main functions of plant stems. Stems have five main 
functions  which  are  a)  carry,  support  and  expose  leaves  to  light  and  air b) 
transportation of water and mineral salts c) translocation of manufactured food d) 
storage  of  nutrients and  e)  perform  metabolic  functions  such  as  photosynthesis 
and respiration. 
 
2.2.2 External structure 
Hope you will agree that the close association of the stem with the leaves make 
the aerial part of plant axis strictly more complex than the root. Shoot means stems 
and leaves as one system which seems to express the association. In contrast to 
the root, the shoot has nodes and internodes with one or more leaves per node. 
Depending  on  the  development  of  the  internodes  the shoot  assumes  different 
aspects. 
 
Visible or invisible internodes 
Plants  with  well-developed  internodes  tend  to  have  visible  stems  as  in  beans, 
sunflower, maize, bamboos, gmelina, fruit trees and forest trees, while some plants 
like onions and other bulbs and bananas have short invisible or hidden stems as 
their internodes are not well developed. 

33 
 
One or more auxiliary buds per node 
Another  variation  is  the  arrangement  of  leaves  per  node  on  the  stem  which  will 
lead to number of auxiliary buds hence number of the lateral shoots. Some plants 
have one leaf per node hence one axillary bud; others have two leaves per node 
leading  to  two  axillary  buds and  yet  others  have  three or  more  leaves  per  node 
leading to three or more axillary buds. 
 
The differences are also associated with type of growth and habitat of the shoot. 
Air or underground stems for rhizome like in grasses, bulbs like in onions, corms 
like in banana and tubers as in potatoes. Typical examples of land or water shoots 
are rice plants and the water hyacinth. Some shoots are upright while others are 
climbing or creeping. Vines creeping shoots, stolons are also creeping shoots as 
in grasses while some varieties of beans are climbers (Figure 6). 
 
Figure 2.6: Modified stems 
 

34 
 
2.2.3 Internal structure of primary stem 
The stem like the root consists of three tissue systems namely dermal, ground and 
vascular  tissues.  However  the  distribution  of  ground  and  vascular  tissues  vary 
between  stems  of  dicotyledonous  and  monocotyledonous  plants.  In  stems  of 
dicotyledonous  and  gymnospermae  plants,  vascular  tissues  appear  in  separate 
bundles and these bundles are arranged in a circular structure within the ground 
tissue. The inner part of the ground tissue is called pith and the outer one cortex. 
In  stems  of  monocotyledonous  plants, vascular  tissues  form  vascular  bundles 
which are randomly distributed within the ground tissue where the pith and cortex 
cannot easily be separated (Figure 7 a and b). 
 
a 

35 
 
 
b 
Figure 2.7: a) Cross section of dicotyledonous b) cross section of a 
monocotyledonous stem 
 
Dermal tissue 
The dermal tissue in stems continues to be a one celled layer as we have already 
seen in roots and it is called epidermis. This skin is maintained up to maturity in all 
cotyledonous  plants  and  herbaceous  dicotyledonous plants.  Examples  of  the 
herbaceous dicotyledonous plants include bean, peas, sunflower and other small 
leguminous  plants.  However,  in  trees  and  other  larger  dicotyledonous  plants, 
another thicker skin called periderm replaces epidermis at maturity. 
 
Ground tissue 
Unlike in the root, the ground tissue has four major parts. The innermost part is 
called  pith  and  close  to  the  dermal  is  called  cortex  with  three  different  layers: 
hypodermis,  loose  cortex  and  endodermis.  In  stems  the  endodermal  layer  does 
not perform the function as in the root and its cells do not contain suberin. They 
are mainly used to store starch hence referred to as starch cells. 
 

36 
 
Vascular tissue 
Primary vascular system of stems of seed plants consist of strands variable in size 
and degree of distinctness. Individual strands are referred to as vascular bundles. 
Each bundle is composed of xylem and phloem pipes. Xylem and phloem show 
variation  in  relative  position  in  vascular  bundles. The common  arrangement  is 
called collateral where xylem pipes are grouped towards the inner part of the stem 
and phloem takes the outer position (Figure 8) 
 
Figure 2.8: Vascular bundle showing common arrangement of xylem and phloem 
tissue 
 
2.3 Leaves 
In general sense there are quite a number of different types of leaves on a plant 
based on origin, structure and function. Based on these characteristics we come 
across four different types of leaves on a flowering plant i.e. cotyledons, cataphylls, 
floral  and  foliage  leaves.  However,  when  we  talk  of  leaves  we  mostly  refer  to 
foliage leaves also known as true leaves. 
 
2.3.1 Types of leaves and their functions 
Cotyledons 
Cotyledons  are  the  first embryonic leaves  on  the  plant. The  main  function  of 
cotyledon is that they act as placenta and nurse the young plant. 
 

37 
 
Cataphylls 
Structurally, you  will  notice cataphylls  as  bracts  or  scales  on  stems,  roots  and 
flowers of plants. They are found on either stolons, rhizomes of grasses or bulbs. 
Cataphylls offer protection to the shoot and they are also used for storage of food 
and nutrients. 
 
Floral leaves 
Floral  leaves  are  modified  for  reproduction  processes. Structurally,  flowers  are 
made  up  of  four  different  types  of  leaves  each  modified  for  their  own  special 
functions. Such leaves include calyx, corolla, stamen and pistil. 
 
Foliage leaves 
As  we  have  already  indicated,  these  are  the  true  leaves. This  group  of  leaves 
represent the true leaves of the flowering plant. Structurally, the foliage leaf usually 
shows a specialization as a photosynthetic organ of the plant. 
 
Major basic functions of foliage leaves include photosynthesis, gaseous exchange 
and translocation of manufactured food. However, they could also be modified to 
carry  out  other  functions  including  storage,  protection,  propagation  and  holding 
onto other plants and objects. 
 
2.3.2 External structure of foliage leaves 
Foliage  leaf  normally  shows  its  specialization  as  a  photosynthetic  organ  by  the 
expanded platform of its lamina (Figure 9). The leaf shows six major external parts 
including the tip/apex, base, blade/lamina, margins, main central vascular bundle 
(midrib)  and  the  stalk  (petiole  and/or  sheath).  Though  having  leaves  with  these 
major parts, different plants show differences in size, shape, leaf arrangement and 
morphological  appearance  of  their  tips/apices,  margins  and  bases.  Leaves  of 

38 
 
monocotyledonous and gymnospermae usually tend to have long and flat or round 
lamina while most leaves of dicotyledonous usually tend to be broad shaped. 
 
Figure 2.9: Typical dicotyledonous and monocotyledonous leaves 
 
2.3.3 External variations of a foliage leaf 
Below, we will study the common variations that we can see among foliage leaves 
of flowering plants. Apart from differences in shapes and size of the leaves (Figure 
10), leaves show variation in tips, bases (Figure 11), margins and arrangement of 
vascular bundles (venation) (Figure 12). 

39 
 
 
Figure 2.10 Common leaf shapes 

40 
 
 
Figure 2.11 Common leaf apices and bases 
 
Figure 2.12 common leaf margins and arrangement of vascular bundles 
 

41 
 
Leaves may also vary in their arrangement on the stem, pattern of attachment on 
the stem and number of leaves attached at a node. 
 
Leaf arrangement 
This  refers  to  the  number  of  leaves  on  the  node  and  how  leaves  position 
themselves in relation to one another. There are four common leaf arrangements. 
Alternate  leaf  arrangement where one  leaf  per  node  and  these  leaves  are 
positioned  in  alternating  positions for  example maize and beans.  In Cyclic  leaf 
arrangement one  leaf is  attached per  node  but  leaves  are  arranged  in  circular 
form  going  up  the  stem. Opposite  leaf  arrangement has two  leaves  per  node 
positioned opposite to each other. The opposite arrangement could appear in two 
forms. Some plants carry their leaves on one plane others on two planes where 
two  leaves  on  the  lower  node  alternate  with  the  two  leaves  immediately  above 
them for  example Gmalina.  Lastly, whorled  leaf  arrangement where  there  are 
three or more leaves on one node and seem to make a whorl or ring around the 
stem. 
 
Petiole versus Sessile leaves and sheathing base 
In most plants, leaves are seen to be attached to leaf stalks as they immerge from 
a node. This stalk could be a strong round bodied structure (petiole) or flat flexible 
structure (sheath). Such leaf appearance could be regarded as a normal situation. 
However in some plats, leaves are seen to be directly emerging from the node. In 
such situations it is either the stalk is too short that it can be recognized or there is 
no  stalk.  In  this  kind  of  leaf  attachment  to  the  node,  the  leaf  is  referred  to  as  a 
sessile leaf. In other cases, leaf blade coming from the sheath will also be seen 
coming  straight  from  the  stem  with  its  sheath  holding  closely  to  the  stem.  Such 
appearance is referred to as a sheathing base. See diagrams below. 

42 
 
 
Figure 2.13: Leaf bases 
 
Simple versus Compound leaves 
 
A simple leaf has a single blade while the blade of a compound leaf is divided in 
various  ways  into  leaflets  (Figure  15).  Regardless  of  the  number  of  leaflets,  a 
compound leaf still has a single axillary bud at its base. Pinnately compound leaves 
have  the  leaflets  in  pairs  along  an  extension  of  the  petiole  called rachis, while 
palmately compound leaves have all the leaflets attached at the same point at the 
end of the petiole. Sometimes, the leaflets of a pinnately compound leaf may be 
subdivided  into  still  smaller  leaflets  forming  a  bipinnately  compound  leaf  and  a 
further subdivision forming a tripinnately compound leaf (Figure 16). 
 

43 
 
 
Figure 2.14 Simple and compound leaves 
 
Figure 2.15: Palmately compound leaf (C) and pinnately compound leaf (D) 
 
2.3.4 Internal structure of a leaf 
Internal  structure  of  leaves  vary  depending  on  the  prevailing  environmental 
conditions of the habitat plants have been adapted to. Plants can be grouped into 
three groups based on their habitat and internal structural leaf arrangement. Such 
groups include mesophytes, hydrophytes and xerophytes. Mesophytes are plants 
that  require  environment  that  is  neither  too  wet  nor  too  dry. Hydrophytes plants 
require a large supply of water and may grow partly or entirely submerged in water 
while Xerophytes are adapted to a dry hot habitat. 
 
 

44 
 
Internal structure of a mesophytic leaf 
Like roots and stems, the leaf also shows three major groups of tissues namely 
dermal vascular and ground tissues (Figure 17). 
 
Epidermis 
The leaf is covered/protected by two skins, with both made up of similar type of 
cells (epidermal cells) the skin that appears on the upper side of the leaf is referred 
to as an upper epidermis and the one below is referred to as lower epidermis. For 
its  efficient  functional  purposes,  epidermis  is  equipped  with  some  structures 
including cuticle, trichomes and stomata. 
 
 
Figure 2.16: A composites cross section of a mesophytic leaf 
 
Cuticle  is  a  fatty  waxy  substance  which  repels  water.  It  is  mainly coated  on  the 
surfaces of the epidermis for the same purpose of preventing direct entry of water 
from  the  atmosphere. The  other  common  structures found on the epidermis  are 
trichomes (hairs). The epidermal layer of roots has root hairs for the absorption of 

45 
 
water.  The  hairs  either  on  stems  or  leaves  are  mainly  for  protection  and 
temperature regulation. The other popular structures found either on both or one 
side are the natural openings called stomata. These act as openings for gaseous 
exchange.  Based  on the  position  of  the  stomata,  leaves  may  be  referred  to 
Amphistomatic leaf if stomata appear on both sides. Epistomatic have stomata 
on the upper side while hypostomatic have stomata on the lower side. 
 
Ground tissue 
The main part of the body of the leaf is covered by ground tissue and in leaves is 
referred to as mesophyl. The mesophyll has the following characteristics: 
a. mainly composed of parenchyma cells of varying sizes and shapes 
b. cells contain many chloroplasts 
c. large volume of intercellular spaces 
d. It could  be  homogeneously  be  divided  into palisade Mesophyll  with 
elongated  cells  appearing  in  columns or  Spongy  Mesophyll  with regular 
sloped cells. 
 
Leaves  may  have  one  or  more  rows  of  palisade  parenchyma  cells. Leaves of 
plants  adapted  to  mesophytic  habitats  commonly  have  one  row  of  palisade 
parenchyma cells. On the other hand leaves adapted to xerophytic habitat tend to 
have two or more rows of palisade parenchyma cells. 
 
Vascular tissue 
The Vascular System of the leaf is distributed throughout the blade and thus shows 
a  close  spatial  relation  to  mesophyll.  Vascular  strands  form  an  interconnected 
system in the median plane of the blade parallel with the surface of the leaf. The 
Vascular bundles in the leaf are commonly called veins, and the patterns formed 
by the veins, venation, as seen with the unaided eye. The venation appears in two 
main patterns, the reticulate or netted which is mainly associated with leaves of 

46 
 
dicotyledonous plants, and the parallel which is mainly associated with leaves of 
monocotyledonous plants. 
 
2.4 Flowers 
2.4.1 Functions, structure and variations. 
You  will  recall  that  it  was  mentioned  that flowers  are  a  form of  modified  leaves. 
They   are   modified   for   a   purpose   of   carrying   out   reproductive   processes. 
Structurally, a standard flower depicts four groups of such modified leaves but this 
is not common to all flowers. Other structural variations will be observed in size, 
colour, number of parts and arrangement of these floral parts. Below we intend to 
discuss functions, structure and common variations in flowers. 
 
A flower as a group of specialized floral leaves are adapted for: - 
a) Production and development of reproductive cells (pollen ♂ and ovules ♀) 
b) Pollination:- the transfer of pollen  
c) Fertilization:- the unification of two protoplasmic bodies usually from different 
individual plants to form one body (protoplast - zygote). 
d) The ultimate development of the seed and fruit. 
e) Successful dispersal of the seeds (fruits) 
 
2.4.2 Morphological structure. 
Flowers are of many different forms. They also vary greatly in size, colour, number 
of  parts  and  arrangement  of parts. Each  flower  is an  assemblage  of  fertile  and 
sterile organs in preparation for the five activities above. See figure 18 below. 

47 
 
 
Figure 2.17: Classification of floral parts 
 
A typical flower is composed of four whorls of modified leaves. These are sepals, 
petals,  stamens,  and  a  carpel  or  carpels.  All  attached  to  the  receptacle,  the 
modified stem end that supports these structures (Figure 19). 
 
 
 
The sepals enclose the other flower parts in the bud. Generally, they are green. 
All the sepals taken collectively constitute the calyx; that is, the catalyx of a flower 
is composed of more or less distinct parts, the sepals. 
Figure 2.18 a typical flower 

48 
 
The petals are usually the conscpicuous, colored, attractive flower parts. Taken 
together, the petals constitute the corolla. 
 
The stamens form a whorl, lying inside of the corolla. Each stamen has a slender 
stalk or filament, at the top of which is an anther, the pollen-bearing organ. The 
whorl or grouping of stamens is called the androecium. Collectively the carpels 
are  spoken of  as the gynoecium. Each  individual  structure  in  the gynoecium  is 
commonly referred to as a pistil. There are generally three distinct parts to each 
pistil.  
a) An expanded basal portion, the ovary, in which are borne the ovules,  
b) The style a slender hollow stalk which lies between the ovary and the stigma 
above.  
c) The stigma: The pollen is deposited on the stigma for initiation of successful 
fertilization. 
 
Summary on the floral parts 
The parts of the flower in outline are as follows: 
Receptacle 
Calyx, consisting of sepals 
Corolla, consisting of petals            
 
Androecium, consisting of stamens 
Gynoecium, consisting of carpels 
 
Variations 
(a) complete and incomplete / perfect vs imperfect 
fertile and essential parts 
sterile parts collectively known as perianth 

49 
 
If a flower has a stamen, pistil, petals, and sepals, it is called a complete flower.  
If one of these parts is missing, the flower is called incomplete. The stamen and 
pistil are the essential parts of a flower and are involved in seed production. If a 
flower contains both functional stamens and pistils, it is   called a perfect flower, 
even  if  it  does  not  contain  petals  and/or  sepals.  If  either  stamens or  pistils  are 
lacking, the flower is called imperfect. Female (Pistillate), and Male (Staminate) 
flowers (figure 18). 
 
Figure 2.19: Complete and incomplete flowers 
 
(b) Whorled and spiral arrangements 
In most flowers the sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels are in whorls or circles on 
the axis of the flower.  In contrast with this cyclic or whorled arrangement of flower 
parts is the arrangement in which one or more sets of flower parts are in spirals.   

50 
 
 
Figure 2.20: Whorled versus spiral arrangement 
 
(c) Union of flower parts. coalescence. 
In many flowers, the members of one or more whorls are to some degree united 
with one another, or are attached to members of other whorls. The union with each 
other of members of a given whorl is termed coalescence. 
 Whorl  No Coalescence     Coalescence  
 Sepals   aposepalous           synsepalous, synsepaly 
 Petals   apopetalous          sympetalous, sympetaly 
 Stamens  apoandrous           synandrous, synandry 
 Carpels   apocarpous          syncarpous, syncarpy 
 
 
 

51 
 
(d) Elevation of flower parts 
In this variation, we consider the relationship between the position of the ovary and 
the rest of the other parts. In some flowers, the receptacle is convex or conical and 
the  different  flower  parts  are  arranged  one  above  the  other.  They  occur  in  the 
following order (beginning with the lowest): sepals, petals, stamens, and carpels. 
A flower of this type is said to be Hypogynous. (Superior Ovary) (Figure 20). 
 
Figure 2.21 superior ovary positioned above other floral parts 
 
If the sepals, petals and stamens appear to come from the top of the ovary, the 
flower is said to be Epigynous (Inferior Ovary) (figure 21). Intermediate between 
the hypogynous and epigynous types are those flowers in which the sepals, petals 
and stamens have their origin, not above or below the pistil, but around the ovary. 
This type of flower is said to be perigynous (Figure 22). 
 

52 
 
 
Figure 2.22: inferior ovary epigynous as depicted by pumkin flowers 
 
 
Figure 2.23: intermediate ovary perigynous 
 
(e) The composite flower 
As  the  name  implies  the  composite  flower  is  a  group  of  many  small  flowers 
arranged  to  give  the  appearance  of  a  single  typical  flower.  Good  examples  are 
depicted by sunflower, pineapples, mangoes and maize (Figure 21). 
 

53 
 
 
Figure 2.24 Composite flowers 
 
(f) The Grass Flower 
Flowers of monocotyledonous plants have their flower parts (whorls), in threes or 
multiples of three as opposed to flowers of dicotyledonous plants which tend to be 
in fours  or fives  or multiples  of four and/or five i.e.  sepals,  petals, stamens,  and 
gynoecium. 
 
The   grass   flower   is   regarded   as   an   extremely   reduced   form   of   a   basic 
monocotyledonous flower type. In the gramineae family (Grasses), the perianth 
(Sepals  +  Petals),  is  reduced  to  two  segments  which  appear  as scales  called 
lodicules. Stamens appear in threes with very large lobes of anthers (Two on each 
filament). Gynaecium is reduced to a single chamber ovary (One seed ovary) with 
two  feathery  styles  and  with  a  wide  feathery  stigma.  Such  flower  is  referred  to 
floret (Figure 24). The flower is adapted to wind pollination. 

54 
 
 
Figure 2.25 Individual grass flower called floret 
 
Individual flower in grasses appear as composite flowers in form of inflorescence 
(Figure 25). Each ellipse represents a complete spikelet. Grass flowers generally 
grow in a head or spike. 
 
In  all  instances  the  individual  small  flowers  or  florets  are  associated  in  groups 
known as spikelets. Each spikelet is separated from its neighbours by two small 
modified leaves or bracts, known as glumes (Figure 26). They are found at the 
base of the spikelet. A separation of the glumes reveals the individual florets which 
vary  in  numbers  ranging  from  three  to  eight  depending  on  type  grasses.  The 
spikelet is attached to a slender stalk called the rachilla. Each floret is in turn is 
protected by two additional bracts, the lemna and the palea (Figures 24 and 26). 
 
The lemna may have attached to it a long slender whip-like structure called awn. 
The essential parts consist of the androecium composed of three stamens and 
the gynoecium of two fused carpels. When the flowers are mature the palea and 
lemna separate slightly, exposing two featherly stigmas and allowing the anthers 

55 
 
to hang free from the spikelet on greatly lengthened filaments. At the base of the 
floral parts there may be distinguished two small protuberances called lodicules. 
These are thought to be the greatly modified perianth parts and are supposed to 
function in the separation of the lemna and palea at pollination time. Lodicules act 
as sponges, when filled with water they expand hence pushing lemna and palea 
apart. 
 
Figure 2.26: Common types of grass inflorescence 
 
 
Figure 2.27 Spikelet and floret 
 
 Unit 2 Practical activities 
Refer to Unit 2 of the practical module. 

56 
 
 
 Unit 2 Summary 
In this unit, we have discussed the morphology, anatomy and functions of 
the  basic  organs  that  make  a  flowering  plant  ie  roots,  stems,  leaves  and 
flowers. 
 
Roots  are  basically  there  to  provide  anchorage  of  the  plants  in  the  soil. 
However, they   also   have   other   functions   including   absorption   and 
transportation   of   water   and   mineral   salts   from   the   soil,   storage   of 
manufactured  food,  translocation  of  manufactured  food  to  other  required 
places, and other specialised functions. Roots are basically devided in three 
structural and functional groups called tissues. Such tissues include dermal, 
ground and vascular. 
 
Stems  are  subdivided  into  nodes  and  internodes.  Leaves  and  any  other 
appendages of the plants grow from the nodes of the stems. Apart from this 
function, stems are also known to transport water from roots to leaves. They 
also translocate manufactured food between leaves and roots and within its 
own body. Other functions include storage, support and other specialised 
ones as discussed in the text. Like in roots, they also show three structural 
and  functional  groups  of  tissues  are  present  in  the  stem.  However  the 
arrangement of these tissues especially the ground and vascular is different 
in stems as in roots. 
 
We have learnt that based on origin, structure, function and position, plants 
may produce four different types of leaves i.e cotyledons, cataphylls, floral 
and foliage leaves. Much emphasis of our discussion has been mainly on 
the  foliage  leaves.  These  leaves  are  basically  present  on  the plants  for 

57 
 
photosynthetic  activities.  Apart  from  this  function  they  also  perform  other 
specialised  functions.  As  a  photosynthetic  apparatus,  leaves  tend  to  be 
broad-shaped as solar panels. The leaf body is covered with two skins, one 
on the upper side and another on the lower side. The space between the 
two skins is mostly covered by ground tissues. But here and there, we see 
vascular tissues in form of veins appearing. 
 
Flowers  in  plants  appear  as  modified  stems  and  leaves  for  reproductive 
purposes. Each standard flower is made up of four basic parts i.e. sepals, 
petals, stamens and pistils. However, we see a lot of variations in flowers 
with  regards  to  the  numbers,  arrangement,  sizes,  colour  and  shapes  of 
these four parts. 
 Unit 2 Test 
1. Name the three basic tissues present in all three vegetative organs 
of a plant. 
2. With aid of well labelled diagrams, show how the above tissues are 
arranged in: 
a) Roots 
b) Monocotyledonous stems 
c) Dicotyledonous stems 
d) Leaves 
3. Draw and label a root tip 
4. State five main functions of a normal root 
5. Name and state a function of any five specialised roots 
6. Define the following terms: 
a) Meristem 
b) Sessile leaf 
c) Cataphylls 
d) Senescence 

58 
 
e) Floret 
f) Perfect flower 
g) Trichome 
h) Whorled arrangement of leaves 
i) Epidermis 
j) Phloem 
7. Differentiate between: 
a) Taproot and adventitious root systems 
b) Arrangement   of   vascular   tissues   in   dicotyledonous   and 
monocotyledonous stems 
c) Unisexual and bisexual flowers 
d) Amphistomatic and hypostomatic leaves 
e) Annual and perennial plants 
f) Hypogenous and epigynous flowers 
8. Write short notes on the following: 
a) Veination in plant leaves 
b) Patterns of leaf arrangements on the stem 
c) Life cycle of flowering plants 
d) Endodermal tissue of the root 
 Unit 2 answers 
 
 
 Reading Assignment  
 
 
 

59 
 
Unit 3: Introduction to genetics 
 
Introduction 
You may be surprised as you read human history that people were unaware of the 
scientific details of how offspring were conceived and how heredity worked. Clearly 
they  noticed  the  hereditary  relationship  between  parents  and  children  but  not 
hereditary mechanisms. 
 
In  this  unit  we  will  try  to  understand  the  genetic  basis  of  hereditary  mechanism. 
However,  before  we  discuss  these  we  will  start  by  recapping  what  you  learnt  in 
Biology I module, unit 2; structure and function of the cell. We will also look at the 
theories  that  tried  to explain  the  origin  of  life  and  how  variations  occur  between 
parents and offspring. Finally we will discuss how allele and genotype frequencies 
vary from generation to generation within a family and populations. 
Unit 3: learning objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to:- 
a. recap the structure and function of a cell 
b. discuss the theories of the origin of life 
c. evaluate Mendelian monohybrid ratios, dihybrid ratios and test cross 
d. identify  conditions  that  may  lead  to  a  modification  of  Mendelian  monohybrid 
and dihybrid ratios 
e. analyse allele and genotype frequencies in a population 
 
 
 
 

60 
 
Unit 3 key terms 
Ensure that  you  understand  the  key  terms  or  phrases used  in  this unit  as  listed 
below:-  
chromatin  
nucleolus spontaneous 
generation  
inheritance    of    acquired 
characteristics  
blending theory  
particulate theory  
cross-fertilisation  
self-pollination  
hybridisation  
monohybrid  
F1 generation  
F2 generation  
law of segregation  
law of independent 
assortment  
test cross  
heterozygosity  
zygosity  
dominance 
 
Unit 3 Content 
3.1 Structure and function of the cell (recap) 
By now you should know that although living things have different forms, they are 
all cellular meaning that they are composed of at least one cell as a basic unit of 
life and that each cell comes from a pre-existing cell. Robert Hooke was the first 
to  describe  cells  after  observing  cork  slices  using  a  microscope  and  coined  the 
term Cell. 
  
You  will  also  appreciate  that  our  knowledge  of  cells  has  grown  dependent  on 
advances done in the field of microscopy. 

61 
 
In  unit  2  of  Biology  I,  we  discussed  that  cell  at  its  basic  structure  has  cell 
membrane, nucleus, organelles and the cytoplasm. The cell membrane is a thin 
bi  lipid  layer  which  separates  the  cell  contents  from  its immediate  environment. 
Plant  cells  also  have  in  addition  the  cell  wall  which  gives  shape  to  the  cell. The 
nucleus is specialised for storage of DNA and controls cell functioning including 
reproduction. The cytoplasm is a liquid substance between the nucleus and the 
cell membrane in which the organelles are located. Organelles on the other hand 
are  small  bodies  with  specific  structures  and  functions  within  the  cell.  The 
organelles   include   the   endoplasmic   reticulum   (both   smooth   and   rough), 
ribosomes,   polysomes,   golgi   apparatus,   vacuoles   and   storage   vesicles, 
mitochondria,    chloroplasts    and    plastids,    cytoskeleton,    microtubules    and 
microfilaments. Some cells may contain cilia and flagella. In addition plants have 
chloroplasts and plastids for harvesting light energy for photosynthesis. 
 
Our interest in this section is to revise structure and function of the nucleus. The 
nucleus  has  two  major  functions:  it  stores  the  cell's  hereditary  material  and  it 
coordinates  the  cell's  activities.  Do  not  forget  that  only  eukaryotic  cells  have  a 
nucleus enclosed in a nuclear membrane 
The nucleus is membrane bound enclosing a semifluid matrix called nucleoplasm. 
The  nucleoplasm  contain  most  of  the  cells  genetic  materials  organized  as  long 
multiple linear DNA molecules in complex with a large variety of proteins such as 
histones  to  form  chromosomes.  Chromatin  is  the  less  condensed  form  of  the 
nucleus. The DNA is the genetic code of the cell. 
  
The nucleus also contains one or more nucleoli. Nucleoli are nucleus organelles 
that  synthesize  protein-producing  macromolecular  assemblies  called  ribosomes 
and a variety of other smaller components. Through the microscope, the nucleolus 
looks like a large dark spot within the nucleus. A nucleus may contain up to four 
nucleoli, but within each species the number of nucleoli is fixed. After a cell divides, 

62 
 
a  nucleolus  is  formed  when  chromosomes  are  brought  together  into  nucleolar 
organizing regions. During cell division, the nucleolus disappears. 
 
A  section  of  a  chromosome  which  controls  a  particular  trait  is  a  gene.  A  locus 
(plural:  loci)  is  the  position  of  a  gene  (Figure  3.1).  The  genes  within  these 
chromosomes  are  the  cells  nuclear  genome  and  structured  in  such  a  way  to 
promote  cell  function.  The  gene  controls  cellular  activities  by  production of 
proteins.  Other  places  where  you  find  DNA  molecules  are  mitochondrion  and 
chloroplasts.  DNA  in  these  organelles  are  involved  in  the  control  of  the  specific 
processes of those organelle. 
 
 
Figure 3.1: The central dogma of molecular biology 
At this point I am sure you are not surprised why the nuclear envelope is a double-
layered membrane with space between the layers called the perinuclear space and 
appears  to  connect  with  the  rough  endoplasmic  reticulum.  The  envelope  is 
perforated with tiny holes called nuclear pores. These pores regulate the passage 
of molecules between the nucleus and cytoplasm, permitting some to pass through 
the  membrane,  but  not  others.  The  inner  surface  has  a  protein  lining  called  the 
nuclear lamina, which binds to chromatin and other nuclear components. During 
mitosis or cell division, the nuclear envelope disintegrates but reforms as the two 
cells complete their formation and the chromatin begins to unravel and disperse. 
 

63 
 
3.2 Theories of the origin of life 
 
Together with the advancement in knowledge about the cell did the motivation to 
answer  the  question  about  the  origin  of  life  (the  cell)  advanced.  Scientists  have 
tried to explain the origin of life on earth which have evolved to produce a number 
of theories. 
 
3.2.1 Spontaneous generation 
 
This is the first theory to be recorded that tried to address the origin of life. The 
belief in spontaneous generation where life is believed to have evolved from non-
living matter dates back to the time of Aristotle and ancient Greek philosophy. The 
theory was advanced together with a belief in heterogenesis where one form of life 
can be derived from a different form. 
 
The  first  experimental  evidence  against  spontaneous  generation  came  in  1688 
when Francesco Redi showed that no maggots appeared in meat when flies were 
prevented  from  laying  eggs.  In  1768,  Lazzaro  Spallanzani  demonstrated  that 
microbes  were  present  in  the  air  and  could  be  killed  by  boiling.  In  161,  Louis 
Pasteur performed a series of experiments that demonstrated that organisms such 
as bacteria and fungi do not spontaneously appear in sterile, nutrient rich media 
but could only appear by invasion from without.  
 
As  you  can  see,  the  belief  of  spontaneous  generation  was  disapproved  and 
begged  for  an  alternative  theory.  Besides the  theory  also  failed  to  explain  the 
occurrence of variations among parents and offspring. 
 
 
 
 
 

64 
 
3.2.2 Inheritance of acquired characteristics 
 
This theory was developed to partially address the existence of variations among 
parents  and  offspring.  The  theory  was  developed  by  Lamarck  who  argued  that 
physiological  changes  acquired  over  the  life  of  an  organism  (such  as  the 
enlargement of a muscle through repeated use) may be transmitted to offspring. It 
is also commonly referred to as the Theory of Adaptation which is related to the 
Evolutionary  Theory  of  French  naturalist  Jean-Baptiste  Lamarck  known  as 
Lamarckism. 
 
This  theory  was  disapproved  by  a  simple  interesting  experiment  conducted  by 
Weismann who removed the tails of 68 white mice, repeatedly over 5 generations 
and observed that no mice were born in consequence without a tail or even with a 
shorter  tail.  Unfortunately,  the  theory  was  consequently  disproved  and  that 
necessitated another theory. 
 
3.2.3 Blending theory 
 
Weismann  then  developed  the  blending theory  which  aimed  at  explaining  the 
existence  of  variations  between  parents  and  offspring.  The  theory  states  that 
offspring  express  phenotypic  characters  intermediate  between  those  of  the 
parents.  However,  the  theory  could  not  explain  how  traits  that  seemingly 
disappeared  for  several  generations  often  reasserted  themselves  down  the  line 
unaltered.  The  theory  could  not  explain  for  example  the  existence  of  some 
characteristics such as albinism from parents with normal skin and hair colour. 
 
3.2.4 Mendelian inheritance theory 
 
Gregor Mendel (1822-1884) was an Austrian monk who discovered the basic rules 
of  inheritance.  From  1858  to  1866,  he  bred  garden  peas, Pisum  sativum,  in  his 
monastery garden and analysed the offspring of these crossings. 

65 
 
 
Gregor Mendel proposed Inheritance theory/ Particulate theory which states that 
similarities  and  differences  between  parents  and  off  springs  are  as  a  result  of 
passage   of   discrete   hereditary   factors/genes.   The   work   of   Mendel   was 
rediscovered after many years after his work was rejected theory when they could 
not find a robust theory to address the shortfalls in the previous theories. 
Mendel succeeded to come up with principles that lead to the development of this 
theory that has not been challenged to date because of the following factors:- 
 
a) knowledge of statistics which he used to predict and verify outcome of his 
experiments 
b) choice  of  subjects  for  experiments,  he  used  garden  peas  which  can  be 
cross pollinated or self-pollinated 
c) choice of traits, he looked at one trait at a time 
d) many varieties were available that bred true for clear cut quantitative traits 
analysis such as seed texture, seed colour, flower colour, growth habit  
e) the way of presenting results, he used numbers to represent whatever he 
discovered 
f) his background, he was interested in breeding experiments 
 
3.3  Mendelian monohybrid, dihybrid ratios and test cross 
 
Prior  to  his  work  with  pea  plants  plant  breeders  had  conducted  experiments 
aimed  at  obtaining  flowers  with  new  varieties  of  colours.  You  probably  are 
aware  that  when  two  distinct  individuals  with  different  characteristics  are 
crossed to each (hybridization) their offspring are referred to as hybrids. Mendel 
chose the garden pea to investigate the natural laws that govern plant hybrids. 
In some experiments, Mendel carried out self-fertilisation which means that the 
pollen  and  egg  were  derived  from  the  same  plant.  Cross  pollination  is  when 
pollen from one plant is placed on a stigma of a different plant.  
 

66 
 
Before starting his experiments he concentrated on obtaining several varieties 
of  peas  that  were  considered  to  be  distinct. These plants  were  different  with 
regards to many morphological characteristics. The general characteristics of 
an organism are called characters. The term trait and variant are typically used 
to describe the specific properties of a character. A variety that produces the 
same trait after several generations of self-fertilization is called true breeding 
line. 
 
After obtaining true breeding lines for seven traits (Figure 3.2), Mendel studies 
these characters by crossing the variants to each other. A cross in which an 
experimenter is observing only one character is called monohybrid cross also 
called  single  factor  cross.  When  the  two  parents  are  different  variants  for  a 
given character, this type of cross produces single character hybrids also called 
monohybrids. 
 
 
Figure 3.5: Seven Characteristics of peas Mendel studied 
 
Mendel’s experimental procedure began with true breeding plants that differed 
with regards to a single character. These are termed the parental generation of 
P generation. When the true breeding parents were crossed to each other, this 
is  called  p  cross  and  the  offspring  constitute  the  F1  generation  for  first  filial 
generation. Mendel observed that all F1 generation showed the phenotype of 
one parent. This prompted Mendel to follow the transmission of this character 

67 
 
for  another  generation.  To  do  this,  the  F1  generation  were  allowed  to  self-
fertilize to produce a second generation called F2 generation for second filial 
generation. 
 
 
 
 
 
P = Parentals (True breeding, 
Homozygous and Homogametic) 
 
F1 generation (Heterozygous, 
Heterogametic) 
 
F2 generation (Gives 3:1 Mendelian 
monohybrid ratio)  
Figure 3.3: Mendelian monohybrid cross 
 
From  the  data  that  he  obtained  from  this  experiment,  Mendel  made  a 
quantitative analysis of data from which he was able to propose the following 
important ideas. 
 
a) Mendel data argued strongly against a blending mechanism of heredity.  
b) Variant  for  one  character  is  dominant  over  another  variant.  The  term 
recessive is used to describe a variant that is masked by the presence of a 
dominant  trait  that  is  masked  by  the  presence  of  a  dominant  trait  but 
reappears in subsequent generations. 
c) Dominant  trait  was  always  observed  in  F1  generation  for  heterozygous 
plants. 
d) Genetic  determinants  of  traits  are  passed  along  as  unit  factors  from 
generation to generation. His data were consistent with a particulate theory 

68 
 
of inheritance in which the genes that govern traits are inherited as discrete 
units that remain unchanged as they are passed from parents to offspring. 
e) Mendel compared the numbers of dominant and recessive traits in the F2 
generation, he noticed as recurring pattern. Within experimental variations, 
he always observed approximately a 3:1 ratio between the dominant traits 
and the recessive trait. 
 
Mendel  was  the  first  scientist  to  apply  this  type  of  quantitative  analysis  in  a 
biological experiment. This quantitative approach allowed him to propose a law 
of segregation of genes. 
 
Law of Segregation of genes (the "First Law") 
The  Law  of  Segregation  states  that  every  individual  organism  contains  two 
alleles for each trait, and that these alleles segregate (separate) during meiosis 
such  that  each  gamete  contains  only  one  of  the  alleles.  An  offspring  thus 
receives a pair of alleles for a trait by inheriting homologous chromosomes from 
the parent organisms: one allele for each trait from each parent. 
 
Molecular proof of this principle was subsequently found through observation 
of meiosis by two scientists independently, the German botanist Oscar Hertwig 
in 1876,  and  the  Belgian  zoologist  Edouard  Van  Beneden  in  1883.  Paternal 
and maternal chromosomes get separated in meiosis and the alleles with the 
traits  of  a  character  are  segregated  into  two  different  gametes.  Each  parent 
contributes a single gamete, and thus a single, randomly successful allele copy 
to their offspring and fertilization. 
 
Law of Independent Assortment (the "Second Law") 
 
After   understanding   heredity   mechanisms   of   monohybrid   traits   Mendel 
proceeded to investigate the pattern of inheritance for two different characters. 
He carried out two factor crosses also known as dihybrid crosses in which he 

69 
 
followed the inheritance of two different characters within the same groups of 
individuals. 
 
Let us consider an experiment in which one of the characters was seed shape 
found  in  round  or  wrinkled  variants,  the  second  character  was  seed  colour 
which existed as yellow and green variants. 
 
Mendel took peas with round (R) and green (Y) seeds and crossed them with 
wrinkled (R) and yellow (y) seeds in a cross as shown below. 
 
 P1:    RRYY  x rryy 
 Gametes (heterogametic):  RY  ry 
 F1:    RrYy (round and green seeds) 
 
 
He then selfed F1 to obtain F2 and or this we use a Punnett square as shown 
in Figure 3.4 below. 
 
 
Figure 3.4: Punnet square for Mendelian dihybrid cross 
 
This gave Mendelian dihybrid ratio, 9:3:3:1 of round green seeds: round yellow 
seeds:  wrinkled  green  seeds:  wrinkled  yellow  seeds.  From  these  results,  he 
came up with the law of independent assortment which states that alleles for 

70 
 
separate traits  are  passed  independently  of  one  another  from  parents  to 
offspring. 
You can simplify this when you consider that the law states that the biological 
selection  of  an  allele  for  one  trait  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  selection  of  an 
allele for any other trait. Mendel found support for this law in his dihybrid cross 
experiments.  In  his  monohybrid  crosses  he  idealized  a  3:1  ratio  between 
dominant  and  recessive  phenotypes  while  in  dihybrid  crosses  he  found  a 
9:3:3:1 ratio. This shows that each of the two alleles is inherited independently 
from the other, with a 3:1 phenotypic ratio for each. 
 
Test cross 
 
In  genetics,  a  test  cross,  first  introduced  by  Gregor  Mendel,  involves  the 
breeding of an individual with a phenotypically recessive individual, in order to 
determine  the  zygosity  of  the  former  by  analysing  proportions  of  offspring 
phenotypes. Zygosity can either be heterozygous or homozygous. Those that 
are heterozygous have one dominant and one recessive allele. Individuals that 
are  homozygous  dominant  have  two  dominant  alleles,  and  those  that  are 
homozygous recessive have two recessive alleles 
 
 
Figure 3.5: Genetic test cross 
 

71 
 
 
Test crosses involve breeding the individual in question with another individual 
that expresses a recessive version of the same trait. Analysing the proportions 
of dominant and recessive offspring determines if the individual in question is 
homozygous  dominant  or  heterozygous.  If  all  offspring  from  the  test  cross 
display  the  dominant  phenotype,  the  individual  in  question  is  homozygous 
dominant;  if  half  the  offspring  display  dominant  phenotypes  and  half  display 
recessive phenotypes, then the individual is heterozygous (Figure 3.5). Since 
the homozygous  recessive  individual  can only  pass  on  recessive  alleles,  the 
alleles  the  individual  in  question  passes on determine  the  phenotypes  of  the 
offspring. 
 
Modification of Mendelian monohybrid and dihybrid ratios 
 
Mendel  explained  inheritance  in  terms  of  discrete  factors  ‘genes’  that  are 
passed   along   from  generation   to   generation   according   to the   rules  of 
probability.  Mendel's  laws  are  valid  for  all  sexually  reproducing  organisms. 
However,  Mendel's  laws  stop  short  of  explaining  some  patterns  of  genetic 
inheritance. Cases where Mendel's laws can strictly account for the patterns of 
inheritance are  relatively  rare.  Often,  the  inheritance  patterns  are  more 
complex. 
 
Until the end of this section we will discuss some of the cases which may lead 
to  modification  of  Mendelian  monohybrid  and  dihybrid  ratios  which  include 
codominance,  multiple  alleles, lethal  alleles,  duplicate  genes,  epistasis,  non-
epistasis,  complementary  genes,  polygenic,  linkage,  sex  linkage,  autosomal 
linkage and mutations, 
Dominance is a relationship between alleles of one gene in which the effect on 
phenotype of one allele masks the contribution of a second allele at the same 
locus.  The  first  allele  is  dominant  and  the  second  allele  is  recessive. 
Dominance is a key concept in Mendelian inheritance and classical genetics. 

72 
 
Often the dominant allele codes for a functional protein whereas the recessive 
allele does not. Inheritance of such alleles reads to the classical Monohybrid 
ratio of 3:1 or Mendelian dihybrid 9:3:3:1 ratio. 
 
Incomplete dominance 
Incomplete dominance is a form of intermediate inheritance in which one allele 
for a specific trait is not completely expressed over its paired allele. This results 
in a third phenotype in which the expressed physical trait is a combination of 
the phenotypes of both alleles. 
 
e.g. P1 Flower colour:  RR (red) x WW (white) 
  Gametes (Homogametic)  R  W 
  F1:     RW (pink) 
  F2:   RR RW RW WW 
   
Genotype ratio = 1:2:1 (RR:RW:WW) and  
Phenotype ratio of 1:2:1 (red: pink: white) 
 
Codominance 
 
Co dominance occurs when the contributions of both alleles are visible in the 
phenotype. Co dominance where allelic products co-exist in the phenotype is 
different from incomplete dominance where the quantitative interaction of allele 
products produce an intermediate phenotype. In co dominance for example, a 
red homozygous flower and a white homozygous flower will produce offspring 
that  have  red  and  white  spots.  When  plants  of  the  F1  generation  are  self-
pollinated, the phenotype and genotypic ratio of the F2 generation will be 1:2:1. 
 
The MN blood group in humans is under the control of a pair of co-dominant 
alleles, L
M
 and L
N
 based based upon two genes (glycophorin A and glycophorin 
B) on chromosome 4. 

73 
 
 
 
If an individual with M blood type (L
M
L
M
) is married to an individual with N blood 
type (L
N
L
N
) the F1 will have MN blood type (L
M
L
N
) as shown below. 
 
  P1: MN blood group: L
M
L
M
 (M) x L
N
L
N
(N) 
  Gametes (homogametic): M  N  
  F1:    LMLN (MN) 
 
Multiple alleles 
Multiple  alleles  is  a  type  of  non-Mendelian  inheritance  pattern  that  involves 
more   than   just   the  typical   two   alleles   that   usually   code  for  a   certain 
characteristic  in  a  species.  With  multiple  alleles,  there  are  more  than  two 
phenotypes available depending on the dominant or recessive alleles that are 
available in the trait and the dominance pattern. However, only two forms of the 
alleles exist in a diploid individual. Why? 
 
We  will  look  at  the  most  well-known  ABO  blood  type  system  to  help  us 
understand how multiple alleles work. There are four principal types A, B, AB 
and O. There are two antigens and two antibodies that are mostly responsible 
for the ABO types. A and B are co-dominant and both are dominant over O. 
Below are the phenotypes you would expect for each genotype. 
 
  Genotype I
A
I
B
 = Phenotype AB 
   Genotype I
A
I
A
 and I
A
I
O
 = Phenotype A 
   Genotype I
B
I
O
 = Phenotype B 
   Genotype I
O
I
O 
= Phenotype O 
 
Lethal alleles 
Lethal alleles are alleles that cause 100% mortality in the organism that carry 
them.  They  are  usually  a  result  of  mutations  in  genes  that  are  essential  to 

74 
 
growth   or   development.   Lethal   alleles   may   be   recessive,   dominant   or 
conditional depending on the gene or genes involved. Lethal alleles can cause 
death of an organism prenatally or any time after birth, though they commonly 
manifest early in development. 
 
Lethal  alleles  were  first  discovered  by  Lucien  Cuénot  in  1905  while  studying 
the inheritance  of  coat  colour  in  mice.  The  agouti  gene  in  mice  is  largely 
responsible for determining coat colour. The wild-type allele produces a blend 
of yellow and black pigmentation in each hair of the mouse. This yellow and 
black blend may be is referred to as 'agouti' in colour. One of the mutant alleles 
of the agouti gene results in mice with a much lighter, yellowish colour. When 
these yellow mice were crossed with homozygous wild-type mice, a 1:1 ratio of 
yellow  and  dark  grey  offspring  were  obtained. This  indicated  that  the  yellow 
mutation is dominant, and all the parental yellow mice were heterozygotes for 
the mutant allele. 
 
Let us consider what was happening in these crosses. 
 
e.g. Wild type genotype (agouti) =  AyAy  
  Ayay = Yellowish colour,  
  if we take  P1:  Ayay  x  AyAy 
         Gametes:  Ay/ay  Ay 
         F1:             AyAy and Ayay   (in what ratio?) 
 
  selfing agouti  P2:    Ay ay     x       Ay ay       (self the F1) 
    Gametes: Ay /ay 
    F2:  AyAy, Ayay, Ayay, ayay 
    ( ratio of 2:1 of agouti:black rats) 
 
Duplicate genes 
 

75 
 
This  occurs  if  alleles  duplicated.  Duplication  of  alleles  can  result  from  any 
process that result DNA replication or repair. Let us consider this by looking at 
a hypothetical example where by a gene controlling height is duplicated.  
 
  P1:  AABB (tall) x aabb(short) 
  Gametes: AB  ab 
  F1:   AaBb (tall) 
 
All the F1 generation will be tall. Now if we self F1 in a case where 
there are duplicate genes. 
 
  Parents 2: AaBb x  AaBb   
  Gametes:  AB/Ab/aB/ab 
 
Using a punnet square we obtain the following 
 AB Ab aB ab 
AB AABB AABb AaBB AaBb 
Ab AABb Aabb AaBb Aabb 
aB AaBB AaBb aaBB aaBb 
ab AaBb Aabb aaBb aabb 
 
All offspring will be tall except one. The ratio will be 15:1 of tall: short 
instead of the monohybrid 3:1 or dihybrid 9:3:3:1 ratio 
 
Epistasis genes 
Epistasis is the phenomenon of the effect of one gene being dependent on the 
presence of one or more 'modifier genes'. This is a situation where there is a 
gene at locus A which masks expression of another gene at locus B. Locus A 
suppresses the expression of the gene at locus B and it depends on whether 

76 
 
there is a dominant or a recessive gene on locus A. Thus, epistatic mutations 
have different effects in combination than individually.  
 
I hope you will understand this easily by looking at an example of position of 
flowers. Let gene A be responsible for lateral flower position and B is terminal. 
If A and B are epistatic where A maskes the expression of B then. 
 
Genotype AABB will give lateral flower position regardless of the presence of 
a dominant gene for terminal flower. If aa, a recessive gene for lateral flower is 
present then a terminal flower phenotype will be observed. Terminal flower will 
only be expressed where aa is recessive. If loci A is heterozygous, that is there 
is Aa at this locus, lateral flower position will be the phenotype. 
 
Complementary genes 
This is a situation in which two independent pairs of non-allelic genes neither 
of  which  is  functional  without  the  other.  These  are  genes  that  produce  an 
observable effect in an organism only in conjunction with another gene. If seed 
texture  is  controlled  by  two  alleles  A  and  B  and  that  they  two  alleles  are 
complementary to each other it means if AABB is the multilocus genotype the 
seed will be smooth. The following genotypes will give wrinkled seed because 
the other locus is recessive and hence does not complete the other allele. 
 
i.e. AA + BB = smooth seed 
 AA + bb = wrinkled seed 
 aa + BB = wrinkled seed 
 aa + bb = wrinkled seed 
 
Polygenic inheritance 
These are multiple genes determining the degree of a characteristic. One of a 
group  of  genes  in  which  the  number  of  the  genes  present  collectively 
determines the extent of a characteristic. The term “polygenic inheritance” is 

77 
 
used to refer to the inheritance of quantitative traits, traits which are influenced 
by multiple genes. In addition to involving multiple genes, polygenic inheritance 
is also influenced by the environment in someone's development. 
 
Because  many  traits  are  spread  out  across  a  continuum, rather  than  being 
divided into black and white differences, polygenic inheritance helps to explain 
the way in  which these traits are inherited and focused. A related concept is 
pleiotropy, an instance where one gene influences multiple traits. 
 
A typical example would be human height which is controlled by a number of 
gene and depending on the number of genes contributing to the character. The 
individual has a range of possible heights not just discrete values. 
 
Linkage 
Genetic  linkage  is  the  tendency  of  alleles  that  are  close  together  on  a 
chromosome  to  be  inherited  together  during  the  meiosis  phase  of  sexual 
reproduction. Genes whose loci are nearer to each other are less likely to be 
separated  onto  different  chromatids  during  chromosomal  crossover,  and  are 
therefore said to be genetically linked. In other words, the nearer two genes are 
on a chromosome, the lower is the chance of a swap occurring between them, 
and the more likely they are to be inherited together. 
 
Genes that are on the same chromosome are called linked genes. These genes 
are associated in their inheritance, they are inherited together and in the same 
position.  The  linkages  are  found  either  in  sex  cells/sex  chromosomes  or 
autosomal cells/autosome chromosomes. 
 
Sex linkage 
Morgan observed that inheritance of a characteristic depends on whether the 
characteristic is on a male or a female organism. He made these observations 
when he was studying inheritance pattern of eye colour in fruit flies. 

78 
 
 
When he crossed wildtype female fruit flies and red eyed males he observed 
that all females offspring were red eyed but the males had wild type eyes. The 
pattern  was  different when  he  crossed  red eyed  females and  wild  type  eyed 
males. In this crossed he observed that all the offspring had red eyes.  
 
These crosses can be represented as shown below. 
 
  Parents: Female (wildtype) x Male (red eyes) 
     X
c
X
c
   X
C
Y 
  Gametes:  X
C
   X
C
, Y 
F1:   X
C
 X
c 
, X
c
Y, X
C
, X
C
, X
c
Y    
  (all females had red eyes while males had wild type) 
 
When the characteristics are reversed the following phenotypes are observed. 
 
  P1: Female (red eyes) x Male (wild type) 
     X
C
 X
C
  X
c
Y 
  F1:   X
C
 X
C
, X
C
X
C
, X
C
Y, X
C
Y 
     (all of them had red eyes) 
 
There  are  several  examples  of  sex  linked  characteristics  in  human  beings 
however for this purpose it should suffice to mention the following characteristic 
which most of you are familiar with. 
 
1) colour blindiness associated with X 
2) haemophilia, mainly suffered by females  
3) baldnes  
 
 
 

79 
 
Autosomal linkage 
On  the  other  hand  there  are  two  types  of autosomal  linkages;  complete  and 
partial  autosomal  linkages.  Genes  that  are  linked  completely  do  not  assort 
themselves independently as a result they are inherited in a block. 
 
Partial  linkages  come  as  a  result  of  crossing  over  at  meiosis  to  make  new 
combinations   with   other   genes   called   recombinants.   The   frequency   of 
recombinants is used to estimate the distance between genes. 
 
You  will  recall  that  we  noted  that  genes  that  are  far  apart  have  a  higher 
probability  of  crossing  over  than  genes  that  are  close  together.  Morgan 
proposed  a  standard  percentage  combinations  that  1%  of  recombinants 
represent 1 map unit. This you can understand easily when you consider that 
when you have a 1% frequency of recombinants then the two genes are one 
map unit apart. The map unit was named after him as centimorgan hence 1% 
means the two genes are 1 cM (centimorgan) apart. 
 
Let us look at an example from a typical cross of coloured smooth seeds and 
coloured wrickled seeds from which the following combinations were found 
 
Coloured smooth seeds 48.25% 
Coloured wrickled seeds 48.25% 
Colourless wrickled seeds 1.75% 
Colourless smooth seeds 1.75% 
 
Total percentage of recombinants for this experiment is 1.75% + 1.75% = 3.5%. 
We can therefore conclude from this data that the gene for colour and texture 
are 3.5cM apart 
 
 
 

80 
 
Mutations 
We will start by defining mutations as sudden changes to chromosomal DNA 
that  results  into  some heritable  characteristics.  Factors  that  cause mutations 
also  known  as  mutagens  or  mutagenic  factors  have  potential of  denaturing 
proteins  and  DNA.  Mutagenic  factors  can  be  categorised  as  radiation  which 
includes X rays, Alpha rays, gamma rays and beta rays. Ultra violet (UV) light 
is also a radiation that is a mutagen. Another category of mutagenic factors are 
oxidation. Oxidation factors are Hydrogen peroxide H
2
O
2
 and Mustard gas. 
 
There are two types of mutation – gene and chromosome mutation affecting 
the gene and the chromosome respectively 
 
Types of gene mutations 
1) Substitution- nucleotide  is  replaced  by  another. The  nucleotides  work  in 
triples  and  they  code for  a  particular  amino acid. When  one nucleotide  is 
changed the amino acid changes and it affects its function. 
2) Insertion/addition- nucleotide(s) are added to a DNA strand 
3) Inversion- nucleotides  are  cut  off  and pasted  to  the  same  strand  in  an 
inverted way 
4) Deletion- the nucleotide(s) is cut and disappear 
 
These mutations have been illustrated in figure 3.6 below. 
 
 
Figure 3.6:. Types of gene mutations 

81 
 
Types of chromosome mutations 
1) Substitution- a small part of the chromosome is cut and lost but is replaced 
by another part 
2) Translocation/  addition- this  involves  transfer  of  a  chromosome  part  to 
another chromosome 
3) Inversion- part  of  a  chromosome  is  cut  and  joins  the  same  chromosome 
after flipping over. 
4) Deletion- when part of a chromosome disappears 
5) Duplication – a section of a chromosome is repeated 
6) Mutations  involving  change  in  chromosome  number- non- disjunction  at 
anaphase of mitosis or meiosis, this may result in one cell having less or 
more than 2n  
e.g. Male XY female XX . Non disjuction in male may result in XO = tuner 
female, XXY = super male or XXX = super female 
 
 
Figure 3.7: types of chromosomal mutations 
 
3.4  Population genetics 
 
Until now we have focused our attention on genes within individuals and their 
related  family  members.  The  field  of  population  genetics  is  concerned  with 
understanding changes in genetic variations within a group of individuals over 
time. Population genetics seeks to know the extent of genetic variations within 
populations. 
 

82 
 
Different alleles within a population can be identified by phenotypic effects (for 
example colour, size, shape), variations in molecular structure (such as protein 
or DNA). 
 
Population genetics is an extension of our understanding of Mendel’s laws of 
inheritance  and  molecular  genetics.  Conceptually,  all  of  the  alleles  of  every 
gene  in  a  population  make  up  the  gene  pool.  Population  genetics  study  the 
genetic  variation  within  the  gene  pool  and  how  such  variation  changes  from 
one generation to the next. 
 
We will define a population as a group of individuals of the same species that 
occupy  the  same  region  and  can  be  interbreed  with  one  another.  A  large 
population  usually  is  composed  of  smaller  groups  called  local  populations or 
demes.  
 
Population  genetics is  concerned  with  allele  and  genotype  frequencies.  In 
population  genetics  we  want  to  understand  the  prevalence  of  polymorphic 
genes  within  populations.  The  goal  is  to  identify  the  causative  factors  that 
govern changes in genetic variation. Allele frequencies can be used to make 
inferences about mating patterns, selection, migration etc. 
 
Two fundamental calculations are central to population genetics:- 
 
퐴푙푙푒푙푒 푓푟푒푞푢푒푛푐푦= 
푁푢푚푏푒푟 표푓 푐표푝푖푒푠 표푓 푎푛 푎푙푙푒푙푒 푖푛 푎 푝표푝푢푙푎푡푖표푛
푇표푡푎푙 푛푢푚푏푒푟 표푓 푎푙푙푒푙푒푠 푓표푟 푡ℎ푎푡 푔푒푛푒 푖푛 푎 푝표푝푢푙푎푡푖표푛
 
 
퐺푒푛표푡푦푝푒 푓푟푒푞푢푒푛푐푦
= 
푁푢푚푏푒푟 표푓 푖푛푑푖푣푖푑푢푎푙푠 푤푖푡ℎ 푎 푝푎푟푡푖푐푢푙푎푟 푔푒푛표푡푦푝푒 푖푛 푎 푝표푝푢푙푎푡푖표푛
푇표푡푎푙 푛푢푚푏푒푟 표푓 푖푛푑푖푣푖푑푢푎푙푠푠 푖푛 푎 푝표푝푢푙푎푡푖표푛
 
 
 

83 
 
Hardy and Weinberg proposed that allele frequencies in a population remain 
constant—that is, they are in equilibrium—from generation to generation unless 
specific disturbing influences are introduced. These disturbing factors include 
non-random   mating,   mutations,   selection,   limited   population   size   and 
migration. 
 
The Hardy-Weinberg equation is a mathematical equation that can be used to 
calculate  the  genetic  variation  of  a  population  at  equilibrium.  To  explore  the 
Hardy-Weinberg  equation,  we  can  examine  a  simple  genetic  locus  at  which 
there are two alleles, A and a. The Hardy-Weinberg equation is expressed as: 
 
p2 + 2pq + q2 = 1 
 
where p is the frequency of the "A" allele and  
q is the frequency of the "a" allele in the population.  
 
The formula is sometimes written as (p2) + (2pq) + (q2)= 1, representing the 
trivial  fact  that  frequencies  must  add  up  to  one.  The  final  three possible 
genotypic frequencies in the offspring become: f(AA) = p2, f(Aa) =pq and f(aa) 
=  q2.  These  frequencies  are  called  Hardy–Weinberg  frequencies  (or  Hardy–
Weinberg proportions). 
 
In the equation, p2 represents the frequency of the homozygous genotype AA, 
q2  represents  the  frequency  of  the  homozygous  genotype  aa,  and  2pq 
represents  the  frequency  of  the  heterozygous  genotype  Aa.  In  the  simplest 
case of a single locus with two alleles: the dominant allele is denoted A and the 
recessive a and their frequencies are denoted by p and q; freq(A) = p; freq(a) 
= q; p + q = 1. 
 
If the p and q allele frequencies are known, then the frequencies of the three 
genotypes   may   be   calculated   using   the   Hardy-Weinberg   equation.   In 

84 
 
population  genetics  studies,  the  Hardy-Weinberg  equation  can  be  used  to 
measure whether the observed genotype frequencies in a population differ from 
the frequencies  predicted  by  the  equation.  If  the  population  is  in  equilibrium, 
then  we  will  have  freq(AA)  =  p2  for  the  AA  homozygotes    in  the  population, 
freq(aa)   =   q2   for   the   aa   homozygotes,   and   freq(Aa)   =   2pq   for   the  
heterozygotes. 
  
Let  us  consider  data  that  was  collected  in  Britain  on  MN  blood  system.  The 
study found out that the frequency of M to be 0.54 while the frequency of N was 
0.46. From this data we can calculate the frequency of MM, MN and NN blood 
types.  
 
You will notice that the frequency of M is given as p = 0.54 and the frequency 
of N is given as q = 0.46. Assuming that the population is in Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium then expected genotypic frequencies will therefore be 
 
MM MN NN 
p2 2pq q2 
0.294 0.496 0.209 
 
Now  let  us  assume  that  1000  individuals  were  sampled  in  the  following 
generation  and  there  were  298  individuals  with  genotype  M,  489  with  MN 
genotype  and  213  were  NN.  We  can measure  if  this  population  is  in  Hardy 
Weinberg equilibrium using Chi square test. 
 
We  start  by  calculating  the  expected  genotypes  under  Hardy  Weinberg 
equilibrium. Then we can proceed to test if the data is in agreement with Hardy 
Weinberg equilibrium. 
 
 

85 
 
Genotypes MM MN NN 
Expected 294 496 209 
Observed 298 489 213 
 
 
The  table  below  summaries  the  steps  that  we  follow  to  test  whether  the 
frequencies  are  in  agreement  with  Hardy-Weinberg  equilibrium.  We  start  by 
subtracting the expected from the observed and to remove the negatives the 
value is squared. Then in the next column you divide this value by the expected. 
 
In the column the values are added to give a χ
2
 number which you look up in 
the χ
2
 table. Refer to the practical module for more practise and examples. 
 
Observed (O) Expected (E) (O-E)
2
 
(
O−E
)
²
E
 
298 294 16 0.054 
489 496 49 0.099 
213 209 16 0.077 
   
χ
2 
= 0.230 
 
3.5  Principles of genetic evolution 
 
We will define evolution as a change in heritable characteristics of biological 
populations over successive generations. Evolutionary processes give rise to 
biodiversity at every level of biological organisation. 
 
It is believed that all life on Earth shares a common ancestor known as the last 
universal common ancestor (LUCA) which lived approximately 3.5–3.8 billion 
years  ago.  Repeated  formation  of  new  species  (speciation),  change  within 

86 
 
species   (anagenesis),   and   loss   of   species   (extinction)   throughout   the 
evolutionary  history  of  life  on  Earth  are  demonstrated  by  shared  sets  of 
morphological  and  biochemical  traits.  These  shared  traits  are  more  similar 
among species that share a more recent common ancestor, and can be used 
to  reconstruct  a  biological  "tree  of  life"  based  on  evolutionary  relationships 
(phylogenetics) using both existing species and fossils.  
 
In  the  mid-19th  century,  Charles  Darwin  formulated  the  scientific  theory  of 
evolution by natural selection, published in his book On the Origin of Species 
(1859).  Evolution  by  natural  selection  is  a  process  demonstrated  by  the 
observation that more offspring are produced than can possibly survive, along 
with three facts about populations: phenotypic variation, differential fitness and 
heritability of fitness. Thus, in successive generations members of a population 
are replaced by progeny of parents better adapted to survive and reproduce in 
the  biophysical  environment  in  which  natural  selection  takes  place.  Natural 
selection, including sexual selection, is the only known cause of adaptation but 
not  the  only  known  cause  of  evolution.  Other,  non-adaptive  evolutionary 
processes include mutation, genetic drift and gene migration. 
 
Over a long period of time, precise mechanisms of reproductive heritability and 
origin of new traits have remained a mystery. However, in the 1920s and 1930s 
a modern evolutionary synthesis connected natural selection, mutation theory 
and  Mendelian  inheritance.  Modern  evolutionary  synthesis  explains  how 
evolution   acts   on   patterns   of   change   within   individuals.   Some   of   the 
mechanisms include heredity, variations, mutation, recombination, gene flow, 
natural  selection,  genetic  drift,  genetic  hitchhiking,  adaptation,  coevolution, 
cooperation, speciation, extinction. 
 
 
 
 

87 
 
Evidence of genetic evolution 
 
Scientist  have  demonstrated  that  organisms  have  evolved  from  a  common 
ancestor.  This   evidence   constructs   the   theoretical  framework   on   which 
evolutionary theory rests, demonstrates that evolution does occur and is able 
to show the natural processes that led to the emergency of earth's biodiversity. 
This evidence supports the modern evolutionary synthesis. 
 
1. Comparative physiology and biology where strongest evidence comes from 
comparative sequence analysis which examines relationship between DNA 
or   protein   sequences   of   different   species   and   used   in   generating 
phylogenetic trees. 
2. Comparative anatomy in which groups of organism reveal basic similarities 
of certain structural features. This has been demonstrated by atavism which 
is  the  reappearance  of  lost  characters  typical  of  ancestors  and  seen  in 
recent ancestors, similarity in embryogenesis, homologous structures and 
divergent  adaptive  evolution,  nested hierarchies  in  classification,  vestigial 
structures 
3. Paleontology  which  is  the  evidence  obtained  from  the  study  of  past  life 
based on fossil records and their relation to different geologic time periods. 
However,  because  of  limitations  inherent  in  the  record,  there  are not fine 
scales of intermediate forms between related groups of species.  
4. Biogeography in which there is evidence that organisms are adapted to their 
environment.  Data  about  the  presence  or  absence  of  species  on  various 
continents  and  islands  (biogeography)  can  provide  evidence  of  common 
descent and shed light on patterns of speciation. Further evidence can be 
found in continental distribution, island biogeography, endemism, adaptive 
radiations and rings species. 
 
 

88 
 
5. Artificial   selection   demonstrates   the   diversity   that   can   exist   among 
organisms  that  share  a  relatively  recent  common  ancestor.  Experimental 
evolution  uses  controlled  experiments  to  test  hypotheses  and  theories  of 
evolution. 
6. Speciation  is  the  evolutionary  process  by  which  new  biological  species 
arise. 
7. Computer  science  allows  mathematical  modelling  that  iteration  of  self-
changing   complex   systems   to   be   studied,   allowing   a   mathematical 
understanding  of  the  nature  of  the  processes  behind  evolution;  providing 
evidence for the hidden causes of known evolutionary events. The evolution 
of  specific  cellular  mechanisms  like  spliceosomes  that  can  turn  the  cell's 
genome into a vast workshop of billions of interchangeable parts that can 
create tools that create tools that create tools that create us can be studied 
for the first time in an exact way. 
Unit 1 activity 
 Unit 1 Summary 
 Unit test 
1. The ability to taste a bitter chemical, phenylthiocarbamide (PTC), is due to 
a dominant gene.  Use T and t to symbolize the two alleles of this gene. a. 
What is the genotype of a non-taster? What are the possible genotypes of 
a  taster?  b.  Could  a  person  with  two  tasters  as  parents  be  a  non-taster? 
How? 
 
2. In the fruit fly Drosophila melanogaster, vestigial wings and hairy body are 
produced by two recessive genes located on different chromosomes.  The 

89 
 
normal  alleles,  long  wings  and  hairless  body,  are  dominant.  Give  the 
genotype and phenotype of F1 progeny obtained from a cross between a 
vestigial-winged, hairy male and a normal, homozygous female.  If the F1 
from  this  cross  are  permitted  to  mate  randomly  among  themselves,  what 
phenotypic ratio would be expected in the F2 generation? 
 
3. In  humans,  sickle-cell  anemia  is  caused  by  a  recessive  lethal  allele  Hbs; 
individuals who are HbaHbs have sickle-cell trait, but are healthy. a. What 
is the probability of two heterozygous individuals giving birth to a child with 
sickle-cell trait? b. What is the probability of two heterozygous individuals 
giving birth  to  a  child  with  sickle-cell  anemia?  c.  If  a  normal  HbaHba 
individual   receives   a   blood   transfusion   from   a   HbaHbs   individual 
(heterozygous for sickle cell) what are the chances that the HbaHba man 
and his HbaHba wife will have HbaHbs children? 
 
4. A study  on  blood  types  in  a  population  found  the  following  genotypic 
distribution among the people sampled: 1101 were MM, 1496 were MN and 
503  were  NN.  Calculate  the  allele  frequencies  of  M  and  N,  the  expected 
numbers of the three genotypic classes (assuming random mating). Using 
X2,   determine   whether   or   not  this   population   is   in   Hardy-Weinberg 
equilibrium. 
 
5. The  compound  phenylthiocarbamide  (PTC)  tastes  very  bitter  to  most 
persons. The inability to taste PTC is controlled by a single recessive gene. 
In  the American  white  population,  about  70%  can  taste  PTC  while  30% 
cannot  (are  non-tasters).  Estimate  the  frequencies  of  the  Taster  (T)  and 
nontaster  (t)  alleles  in  this  population  as  well  as  the  frequencies  of  the 
diploid genotypes. 

90 
 
Unit answers 
 
Reading assignment/List 
 