

11/27/2025
1
Topic 4: Agri-Marketing Risks, Agricultural Market Linkages 
& International Trade
By end of this topic students should demonstrate competencies by:
1. Establishing strategies of minimizing market risks in agricultural
marketing.
2. Selecting method of integration for farmers to improve marketing
operations.
3. Understanding the role of international trade in agricultural
marketing.
74
Agricultural Marketing Risks
Learning Goals:
Understand the Meaning of Risk; 
Differentiate Risk & Uncertainty;
Understand Key Sources of Agricultural Marketing Risks;
Understand Risk Mitigation Measures
75

11/27/2025
2
Meaning of Risk
Risk:defined as the chance (probability) of suffering a financial lossor
the chance (probability)that the return on an investment will be less
than the expected return.
Examples:
Loss of produce during storage, due to quality deterioration & theft
Loss of produce in transit to markets
Financial losses due to changes in interest rate changes &/or currency
devaluation
Loss of markets due to sudden changes in government policies
76
Difference Between Risk & Uncertainty
Riskimplies that an investor is aware of the probable negative
outcomes of an investment and its associated probabilities.
Uncertaintyrefers to a scenario in which the likelihood of a particular
negative occurrence is unknown.
Nonetheless, risk and uncertainty are used interchangeably
77

11/27/2025
3
Key Sources of Agricultural Marketing Risks
Production and Technical risk
Market Risk
Financial Risk
Institutional Risk
Human & Personal Risk
78
Key Sources of Agricultural Marketing Risks
Production and Technical risk:
Crop and livestock performance depend on biological processes that
are affected by the weather, and by pests and diseases.
Low rainfall or drought may lead to low yields.
Hail or heavy rains could damage or even wipe out crops.
Outbreaks of pests or diseases could also cause major yield losses in crops and
livestock.
Unreliability, non-availability & underperformance of equipment/technology.
The uncertainty associated with returns associated with resources
spent in production is the risk.
79

11/27/2025
4
Key Sources of Agricultural Marketing Risks
Market Risk– Prices and Costs
When marketing actors commit resources to marketing activities, they
do not know for certain what returns they will obtain for their
products.
Price of products may change unexpectedly, due to changes in the
supply of a product, demand for the product, and cost of marketing.
Sometimes price movements follow seasonal or cyclical trends that can
be predicted.
Many times, however, supply or demand will change unexpectedly
and, in turn, affect the market price.
80
Key Sources of Agricultural Marketing Risks
Institutional Risk
These risksarise out of:
Change in government's policy,
Changes in tariffs and tax laws,
Government bans/restrictions of movement of products,
Statutory price controls and
Imposition of levies.
81

11/27/2025
5
Market Integration/Linkages
Market Integration/Linkage:Refers to the expansion of firms by
consolidating additional marketing functions and activities under single
management.
Integration shows relationship of firms in a market.
The extent of integration influences conduct of firms and consequently their marketing
efficiency.
Integration is an attempt at organizing or coordinating marketing processes
to increase operational efficiency and acquire greater power over the selling
and/or buying process.
82
Market Integration: Horizontal Integration
Horizontal Integration/Linkages
Takes place when a firm or agency gains control of other firms or agencies
performing similar marketing functions at the same level in the marketing
chain.
In this integration, marketing agencies (e.g. producers) combine to form one
body with an aim of increasing their market power.
When farmers form a Cooperative they increase negotiation power with buyers
When farmers form co-operatives, they sell their produce in bulk and reduce
cost of marketing.
Horizontal integration of selling firms is generally not in the interest of
consumers.Why?
83

11/27/2025
6
Motives for Horizontal Integration
Buying out a competitor in a time-bound way to reduce competition;
Gaining a larger share of the market and higher profits;
Attaining economies of scale; and
Specializing in the trade.
84
Market Integration...Vertical Integration
Vertical Integration/Linkage
Occurs when a firm combines and performs more than one activity in the
sequence of the marketing process.
Linking together of two or more functions in the marketing process within a
single firm or under a single ownership.
Shortens marketing channel as it reduces number of middlemen.
Example: A flour mill which engages in retailing activity as well.
Examples of Vertical Integration in Malawi:
Central  Poultry  Company:  Input  production-Poultry  production-processing-
Distribution.
Japanese Tobacco International: Tobacco Production (& Buying)-Processing-Exporting
85

11/27/2025
7
Motives for Vertical Integration
Makes it possible for a business to exercise control over both quantity
and quality of product from point of production to point of
consumption.
Risk reduction through improved market co-ordination;
Leads to reduction of marketing costs (e.g. no more costs of hiring
distributors; no more costs for warehousing.
Vertically integrated firms have greater market power than other firms,
in terms of sourcing supplies or distribution network.
86
Vertical Integration...Types
Forward Integration:
Involves a firm assuming another marketing function which is
normally executed after an existing function of a firm
Example: A wholesaler assuming the function of retailing; a
producer assuming function of processing.
Backward Integration:
Involves a firm owning another marketing function which is
normally executed before an existing marketing function of the firm
Example: A Producer assuming function of supplying production
inputs; a processor assuming production function.
87

11/27/2025
8
Market Integration...Types
Conglomeration
A combination of agencies or activities not directly related to each other,
operated under a unified/single management.
Examples of Conglomerates in Malawi:Press Corporation; Mulli Brothers Limited.
Motives/Reasons:
To spread risks
Helps in growth of economies.
Acquisition  of  financial  leverage  (Interdependence  of
firms/companies)
88
International Trade
International trade is the exchange of goods and services
between/among countries. This type of trade gives rise to world
economy.
Refers to exports and imports of goods and services
Import:Buying of goods or services by a home country from a
foreign country
Export:Selling of goods or services from home a country to a
foreign country.
Importance: 
Gives consumers and countries an opportunity to be exposed to goods
and services not available in their own countries.
Promotes efficiency in the use of scarce resources.
89

11/27/2025
9
International Trade
Exports:
Provide market support for the country's agricultural surpluses
Generate forex earnings which increase the country's capacity to import other
goods.
Nonetheless, exports, in the short run, reduce domestic availability of the
commodities exported.
Imports:
Augment domestic availability of goods
Nonetheless, imports in the short run:
Depress the domestic prices.
Reduce forex reserves
In the absence of any public intervention in the domestic market, the producers
gain by exports and lose by imports.
90
WHY INTERNATIONAL TRADE?
Market Seeking Motives:
I. Marketing opportunities:
When marketing opportunities for a product or service get saturated in a
domestic market, a firm can expand its market share by venturing into
markets in other countries.
II. Uniqueness of a product or service:
Product with unique attributes are unlikely to meet any competition in the
overseas markets.
91

11/27/2025
10
WHY INTERNATIONAL TRADE?
Economic Motives:Profitability:
Higher profits from overseas business opportunities is a significant motive for
international trade.
Differences in profitability bet
ween countries may be due to:
Export incentives by the home country government
Low cost of production resources (e.g. labour & capital in host country)
Low levels of competition in a foreign country
92
WHY INTERNATIONAL TRADE?
Strategic Motives:
Growth:
Companies from smaller countries like Malawi, Singapore, Hong Kong,
expansion of business in overseas markets is a must for survival.
However, for companies from larger countries US, China and India, growth
is hardly a motive for international expansion.
Risk:
Operating in several countries reduces dependence on any particular market
and spreads the business risks.
93

11/27/2025
11
World Trade Organization (WTO)
Created in 1947 in Geneva, Switzerland with an aim of facilitating effective
and efficient world trade (acts as a ‘referee’ for international trade)
Initially, calledGeneral Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT).
GATT was replaced by World Trade Organization (WTO) on 1
st
January
1995.
Creation of WTO:Brought international trade rules to areas previously
excluded or subjected to weak rules (such as agriculture, textiles and
clothing), services, trade-related intellectual property rights (TRIPS)
Strengthened the dispute settlement mechanism.
WTO’s objective is to facilitate smooth, fair and predictable trade among
member countries.
94
WTO Rules/ Principles:
Non-discrimination:Any trade concession that a country makes to one
member must be granted toallsignatories. The only exception is with free-
trade areas and customs unions.
Reciprocity:Any nation benefiting from a tariff reduction made by another
country must reciprocate by making similar tariff reductions itself.
Fair competition:If unfair barriers are erected against a particular country,
the WTO can sanction retaliatory action by that country.
Binding tariffs:No country can raise existing tariffs without negotiating
with their trading partners.
WTO has the power to impose sanctions on countries breaking trade
agreements.
95

11/27/2025
12
Methods of Trade Restriction/Protectionism
Tariffs (custom duties):Tax on imports to restrict imports.
Quotas:Limits on quantity of imported or exported products, e.g. maize.
Forex Controls: Include (limits on forex made available to importers; or to
citizens travelling abroad, or for investment; & high charges for purchasing
foreign currencies).
Import Licensing:Requirements that importers must obtain licenses for
importation of products.
Embargoes:Involves government imposing restrictions/total bans on
certain imports/exports to/from certain countries.
Administrative Barriers:Custom delays and excessive paperwork imposed
on exporters/importers just to frustrate exporters/importers.
96
Topic 5: Agricultural Price Policies
What is a Policy?
Any type of state interventions in the market economy.
Examples:
Role of Government in Agricultural Markets:
Creation of a conducive environment for smooth business operations;
To ensure that markets are operating effectively andefficiently-prevent &/or avoid market failures
(e.g.: Failures of competition; externalities; incomplete markets; information failures)
Promotion of people’s welfare, e.g.farmers’ ability to make profits.
Agricultural Price Stabilisation Policies:
What are they;
What for (Why);
How?
Importance Of Price Stabilisation Policies:
Maximisation of agri prod;
Prevents rural-urban migration;
Improves food security;
Improvements inBoP
97

11/27/2025
13
Agricultural Price Policies...
Price Stabilisation policies:
Price Floors,
Price Ceilings,
Import quotas/bans;
Establishment of buffer stock;
Deficiency payment (Price subsidies)
Production Stabilisation Policies:
Production subsidies,
Export bans
98