

      
   
  
 
 
CAP21202 : EXCEL 
 
Section 1: Spreadsheet and Microsoft Excel   
   
What is a Spreadsheet?   
   
"A spreadsheet is a group of values and other data organized into rows and columns similar to the ruled 
paper worksheets traditionally used by bookkeepers and accountants."    
The spreadsheet software is mandatory to create computerized spreadsheets. Microsoft Excel is a form 
of a spreadsheet. There are many terms one must have to know to create a spreadsheet (in brief).    
• A worksheet is the single spreadsheet document.    
• A workbook allows multiple worksheets to be saved together in a single spreadsheet file.   
• Worksheets are divided into rows and columns.    
• The intersection of a row and column, in other words, where a row 
and column meet is called a cell.    
• One must enter content into the active cell, or current cell, it has a 
border around it to make it be easily identified.    
• Data is entered directly into worksheet cells by clicking a cell to 
make it the active cell.    
• Labels, constant values, formulas, and functions are the data that 
is entered into a cell.    
• Before one enters a formula or function into a cell, one must begin with some type of 
mathematical symbol, usually the equal sign (=).   
• Spreadsheets are used to organize and calculate data.    
• It is essential to know how to use spreadsheets for school, work, sports, or anything that requires 
data!   
   
   
The Interface   
   
When you open Excel 2016 for the first time, the Excel Start Screen will appear. From here, you will be 
able to create a new workbook, choose a template, and access your recently edited workbooks.   
   

      
   
  
 
The same with Microsoft Word, to access 
the Excel interface you have to select the 
Blank workbook option form the Excel 
Start Screen.   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
1. Quick Access Toolbar: The Quick 
Access Toolbar lets you an access 
common command no matter which 
tab is selected. You can customize 
the commands depending on your 
preference.   
2. The Ribbon: The Ribbon contains all 
of the commands you will need to 
perform common tasks in Excel. It 
has multiple tabs, each with several 
groups of commands.   
3. Tell Me: The Tell me box works like 
a search bar to help you quickly find 
tools or commands you want to use.   
4. Microsoft Account: From here, you 
can access your Microsoft account 
information, view your profile, and 
switch accounts.   
5. Name Box: The Name box displays the location, or name, of a selected cell.   
6. Formula Bar: In the formula bar, you can enter or edit data, a formula, or a function that will appear 
in a specific cell.   
7. Column: A column is a group of cells that runs from the top of the page to the bottom. In Excel, 
columns are identified by letters.   
8. Cell: Each rectangle in a workbook is called a cell. A cell is the intersection of a row and a column. 
Simply click to select a cell.   
9. Row: A row is a group of cells that runs from the left of the page to the right. In Excel, rows are 
identified by numbers.   
10. Worksheets: Excel files are called workbooks. Each workbook holds one or more worksheets. 
Click the tabs to switch between them, or right-click for more options.   
11. Worksheet View Options: There are three ways to view a worksheet. Simply click a command to 
select the desired view.   
12. Zoom Control: Click and drag the slider to use the zoom control. The number to the right of the 
slider reflects the zoom percentage.   

      
   
  
 
13. Vertical and Horizontal Scroll Bars: The scroll bars allow you to scroll up and down or side to side. 
To do this, click and drag the vertical or horizontal scroll bar.   
   
How to use a Spreadsheet   
The cell address also appears in the Name box in the top-left corner, and that a cell's column and row 
headings are highlighted when the cell is selected.   
   
You can also select multiple cells at the same time. A group of cells is known as a cell range. Rather 
than a single cell address, you will refer to a cell range using the cell addresses of the first and last cells 
in the cell range, separated by a colon.   
Examples:   
                  Cell range A1:A8                                                       Cell range A1:F1   
    
When using a spreadsheet application, the user can use various concepts to compute the data entered 
into the cells in the spreadsheet. These different concepts are provided within the program.    
Some common concepts that are utilized are:    
• Charts   
• Functions  Formulas  • Cell referencing.   
   
Functions   
A function is a pre-programmed mathematical formula to allow the user to make calculations based on 
the data input. The functions under spreadsheets are there to perform a simple calculation by using a 
certain value, called arguments.   
   
Why using functions on spreadsheets?   
• For arithmetic functions to process numerical data.   
• For the use of statistical functions that use analysis tools and averaging tools for finding the 
average of the numbers in a certain row/column on a spreadsheet.    
• The date function that processes and converts dates. This function could be used to put the 
sequential dates in order on the spreadsheet.    
• The logic function that process logic data. An example of logic data would be an AND/OR 
function. If there was something that needed to be marked yes if it is above 5 and marked no if it 
is below 5 then that would be a logic function.    
• The financial functions that process monetary data.    
   
How to use functions?   
• They all must start with an equal sign, the name of the function, parenthesis opening and closing.    
• In the function, a comma or semicolon is used as the delimiter, depending on what settings are 
there in the spreadsheet would depend on which one to use.    

      
   
  
 
• An example would be =SUM(A1:A4), this function would find the sum in those cells.    
• Some of the most common functions are SUM, AVERAGE, IF, COUNT, MAX and MIN.   
   
Formulas   
Mathematical operators   
Excel uses standard operators for formulas, such as a plus sign for addition (+), a minus 
sign for subtraction (-), an asterisk for multiplication (*), a forward slash for division (/), 
and a caret (^) for exponents.   
   
A formula always starts with an equals sign (=), followed by a constant, a function or 
a reference, then followed by an operator, and then followed by another constant, 
function or reference.    
 A constant: is a value that never changes; this includes numbers, dates, titles and other text 
input.    
 References: represent a certain cell, such as “A2”.    
 An operator: is usually a math symbol, such as “+” or “*” which tells the computer how to 
compute (add or multiply) the given constants or functions given in the formula.    
   
   
   
   
Cell References   
While you can create simple formulas in Excel using numbers (for example, =2+2 or =5*5), most of the 
time you will use cell addresses to create a formula. This is known as making a cell reference.  Using 
cell references will ensure that your formulas are always accurate because you can change the value of 
referenced cells without having to rewrite the formula.   
   
Example:   
We want to add the numbers “5” and “2” and display the result below. We are 
typing in cell A3 the equal sign (=) we select cell A5, we press the plus button (+) 
and then select the A2 cell.   
   
   
   
   
When you press Enter, the formula calculates and displays the answer in cell A3   
   
   
   
By doing math equations using cells addresses, if the values in the referenced cells 
change, the formula automatically recalculates.   
   
   

      
   
  
 
   
   
Formulas can also include a combination of cell references and numbers, as in the examples below:   
   
  
Operators are not always arithmetic, they can also be comparison, text concatenation, and reference 
operators. Comparison includes greater than, lesser than, greater than or equal to, and lesser than or 
equal to. To connect two values into one value, a text concatenation (the “and” sign i.e. “&”) is used.    
   
The signs used as reference operators are the following:    
 A colon is used to reference two cells and all the cells between them (i.e. B1:B10)   A comma 
is used to combine multiple references into one reference (i.e. B1:B10,C1:C10)  A space is used 
as an intersection operator.   
There are two ways of doing this:    
1. Relative Cell Referencing.   
2. Absolute Cell Referencing.    
A relative cell reference will adjust as the formula is copied from another cell while an absolute will 
not adjust.    
An example of this would be "=D2+F2" which is row 2 to row 3 which 
will equal "D3+F3". It is also important to note that a user can reference 
both the same sheet and other sheets in a book using this concept.   
   
Tables and Pivot Tables   
   
Tables:   
Just like Microsoft Word, Excel also includes several tools and 
predefined table styles, allowing you to create tables quickly and easily.   
   
How to insert a Table   
1. Select the cells you want to format as a table.   
2. From the Home tab, click the Format as Table command in the 
Styles group.      
3. Select a table style from the drop-down menu.   

      
   
  
 
4. A dialog box will appear, confirming the selected cell range for the table. (*If your table has 
headers, check the box next to My table has headers, then click OK.)   
5. The cell range will be formatted in the selected table style.   
   
Side note: Tables include filtering by default. You can filter your data at any time using the drop-down 
arrows in the header cells.   
   
   
In addition, Excel allows you to modify the table size by including additional rows and columns. There 
are two simple ways to change the table size:   
1. Either by entering new content into any adjacent row or column. (The row or column will be roped 
into the table automatically.)   
2. Click and drag the bottom-right corner of the table to 
create additional rows or columns. (Figure Below)   
   
   
   
   
   
   
Pivot Tables:   
One the most powerful features available in the Microsoft Office spreadsheet program Excel, is pivot 
tables. Pivot tables allow you to manipulate large amounts of raw data. It makes it easy to analyse the 
data in different ways, with a simple click and drag. Some of the features of Pivot Table are:   
• Calculations can be performed by row or column.    
• Data can be filtered or sorted automatically by any or all of the fields.    
• Excel can even recommend a basic layout of a pivot table based on the type of data selected.    
• A wizard is available to assist in the creation of the table.    
• An important thing to remember when using pivot tables is that any time the original data source 
is modified; the data must be refreshed in the pivot.   
   
Example    
Let's say we wanted to answer the question:    
   
What is the amount sold by each salesperson?   
   
Because each salesperson appears on multiple rows 
and we would need to total all of their different 
orders individually, the answer could be time 
consuming and difficult.   
   
   

      
   
  
 
Once you have created a PivotTable, you can use it to answer different questions by rearranging or 
pivoting the data. For example, let's say we wanted to answer: What is the total amount sold in each 
month?    
   
We could modify our PivotTable to look like this:   
   
   
                 
    
                  
 
   
                      
     
   
How to create a PivotTable   
1. First, you need to select the table or cells (including column headers) that you want to include in 
your PivotTable.   
2. From the Insert tab, click the PivotTable command.   
3. The Create PivotTable dialog box will appear. Choose 
your settings, and then click OK.   
4. A blank PivotTable and Field List will appear on a new 
worksheet.   
5. Once you create a PivotTable, you'll need to decide which 
fields to add. Each field is simply a column header from the source data.    
In the PivotTable Field List, check the box for each field you want to add.   
6. The selected fields will be added to one of the four areas below. (In our example, the Salesperson 
field has been added to the Rows area, while Order Amount has been added to Values. Alternatively, 
you can drag and drop fields directly into the desired area.)   
7. The PivotTable will calculate and summarize the selected fields.   
   
   
    
Side Note: Just like with normal spreadsheets, you can sort the data in a PivotTable using the Sort & 

      
   
  
 
Filter command on the Home tab. You can also apply any type of number formatting you want.   
   
Finally, by changing the content of rows columns and values, you can have several results according to 
what you want to calculate.    
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
   
We are going to examine more about the Microsoft Excel Features through our exercises.   
   