

INTRODUCTION TO ORGANIC 
CHEMISTRY
NCHE31205
Dr F. Jagot
SEMESTER II
2024

•The study of compounds containing carbon is called organic 
chemistry.
•Compounds that contain carbon and hydrogen, often in combination 
with nitrogen, oxygen, and/or other elements are known as organic 
compounds.
•Most biologically relevant compounds are organic.
Quinine
cis-retinol
sucrose

•Carbon has four valence electrons; [He]2s
2
2p
2
. 
•It therefore forms four bonds in virtually all of its compounds.
•When all four bonds are single bonds, the molecular geometry is 
tetrahedral –sp
3
hybridized.
•One double bond –trigonal planar –sp
2
hybridized.
•One triple bond –linear –sphybridized.

Drawing molecules
Structural formulae: Shows how the atoms in the organic molecule are 
bonded together. 
•Different types of structural formulae:
1)Displayed formulae/ Lewis structures:
•This shows all the bonds between atoms in the molecule as individual 
lines. 
•All atoms (including carbon and hydrogen) in the organic molecule are 
shown.

•For example, the displayed formula for the following compounds:
ethanalmethane
butane
butanoicacid

2) Condensed structural formulae:
•Condense the C—H bonds in order to simplify the displayed formula. 
For example by writing CH
3
or CH
2
instead of showing these bonds.
•For example:
CH
4
CH
3
—CH
2
—CH
2
—CH
3
CH
3
—CH
2
—CH
2
—C=O  
OH
ethanal
methane
butane
Butanoicacid

•The structural formula can even be condensed further to minimise 
space by avoiding displaying of any bonds.
•For example;
CH
3
COH
CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
CH
3
CH
3
CH
2
CH
2
COOH
•However, does not show presence of multiple bonds, or arrangement 
of atoms in the molecule.
•Substituents are indicated using brackets;
•For example, the condensed formula for 2-hydroxy-3-methylbutane:
is: CH
3
CH(OH)CH(CH
3
)CH
3

3) Skeletal formulae:
•Simplify the representation of organic compounds by omitting C’s and 
H’s in the formula.
•Shows only the skeleton of the compound by representing C—C 
bonds as lines.
•H’s are omitted.
•Any heteroatom (oxygen, nitrogen, halogen) is shown.
•Any functional group is shown, attached to the skeleton.
•For example, the skeletal formula for:
is:

Condensed displayed 
formula
Skeletal formula

Hydrocarbons
•The simplest class of organic molecules is the hydrocarbons, which 
consist only of carbon and hydrogen.
•Contain C—C and C—H bonds.
•C—C bonds form the skeleton / backbone of the molecule, while the 
hydrogen atoms are on the surface or ‘skin’ of the molecule.
•The key feature of hydrocarbons is the presence of stable C—C bonds.
•These bonds are non-polar, and have a high bond strength. 

•Hydrocarbons can be grouped into four categories based on the types 
of carbon-carbon bonds in their molecules:
1.Alkanes
2.Alkenes
3.Alkynes
4.Aromatic hydrocarbons.

Saturated and Unsaturated Hydrocarbons
•Saturated hydrocarbons are those than contain only C—C single 
bonds. 
•They are saturatedwith hydrogen.
•For example, alkanes and cycloalkanes.
•Unsaturated hydrocarbons are those that contain at least one C=C 
double bond or C=C triple bond. 
•For example, alkenes, alkynes, cycloalkenes.

Aliphatic and Aromatic Hydrocarbons
•Aromatic hydrocarbons are those that contain a benzenering in their 
structure.
•Benzene has delocalised (spread out) pi electrons –this gives rise to the 
two resonance structures of benzene.
•They usually have very pleasant smells, hence the name.
•Most organic compounds are aromatic.
•An aliphatic compound is one that consists of no rings; only a straight / 
branched chain. 
•A cyclic compound is one that contains a non-aromatic cyclic ring in its 
structure.

Naming Organic compounds
•Chemists should be able to name organic compounds, so that their 
structures can be drawn.
•Chemists have adopted a set of rules for naming compounds 
established by an organisation called the International Union of Pure 
and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC).
•The naming of an unbranched chain consists primarily of 2 parts;
1)The prefix: this indicates the number of carbon atoms in the chain
2)The suffix (ending): this indicates the functional group/ nature of 
the compound.

Prefixes
•The prefix is determined by the number of carbon atoms in the 
unbranched chain.
Memorize these!!

Suffixes
•The suffix is determined by the functional group of the molecule.
•The reactivity of organic compounds can be attributed to certain 
atoms or groups of atoms within the molecule. These groups of atoms 
make up a functional group.
•A site of reactivity within an organic molecule is known as a functional 
group –it controls how the molecule behaves or functions.





Alkanes
•These are hydrocarbons that contain only single bonds. Thus each 
carbon atom forms four single bonds.
•Names of alkanes end in ‘ane’.
•To name the alkane, add ‘ane’ to the prefix corresponding to number 
of carbon atoms;
Butane
Lewis Structures/Displayed formulae

•General formula for alkanes ; C
n
H
2n+2
•The formulas for alkanes are often written in the form of condensed 
structural formulas.
•For example, the molecular formula for propane is C
3
H
8
. The 
condensed structural formula is CH
3
CH
2
CH
3
.

First few members of the alkanes and their corresponding condensed structural formulae
These are all straight chain hydrocarbons or straight chain alkanes

Structural isomers of alkanes
•Alkanes consisting of four or more carbon atoms can also form 
branched chains.
Compounds with the same molecular 
formula but different structural formula 
(different arrangement of atoms) are known 
as structural isomers.
For example, there are two structural 
isomers for butane.

Pentane has three structural isomers

•Practice Exercise 1:
a)Draw the displayed formula for pentane.
b)Draw the displayed formulae for any 4 structural isomers of 
pentane.

Naming Structural Isomers
•The following steps summarize the procedure for naming structural 
isomers:
1.Find the longest continuous chain of carbon atoms, and use the 
name of this chain as the base name of the compound. the longest 
chain may not always be written as a straight line; 
Groups attached to the main chain are called substituents.

2. Number the carbon atoms in the longest chain, beginning with the end 
of the chain nearest to the substituent. The chain is numbered from the 
end that gives the lowest number for the substituent position.
3. Name and give the location of each substituent group. A substituent 
group that is formed by removing an H from an alkane is called an alkyl 
group. Named by replacing the ‘ane’ending of the alkane with ‘yl’. 
Names and structural formulae of alkyl substituents
Secondary –carbon bonded to 
two other carbons
Tertiary –carbon bonded to 
three other carbons

Note: if the substituent is an OH group, it is given the name ‘hydroxy’.
If the substituent is a halogen, it is given the name ‘halo’. For example a 
chlorine substituent is known as ‘chloro’.
4. When two or more substituents are present, list them in alphabetical 
order. When there are two or more of the same substituent, use a 
prefix (di-, tri-, tetra-) in front of the substituent name.

•Practice exercise 2: a) name the following alkane:
b) Name the following organic compound:
c) Draw the condensed displayed formula for 3-ethyl-2-methylpentane.
d) Draw the skeletal formula for the above alkane.
e) Name the structural isomers for hexane that you drew in Practice exercise 
1.

Classification of carbons
•We classify carbons as primary (1°), secondary (2°), tertiary (3°), or 
quaterniary(4°) based on the number of carbon atoms bonded to 
that particular carbon.

Cycloalkanes
•Cycloalkanes are saturated hydrocarbons that contain carbon atoms 
joined in a ring.
•General formula: C
n
H
2n

•To name cycloalkanes, prefix the name of the corresponding open-
chain hydrocarbon with cyclo-, and name each substituent on the 
ring.
•If there is only one substituent, there is no need to give it a number.
•If there are two substituents, number the ring by beginning with the 
substituent of lower alphabetical order. Number in such a way that 
you get the lowest set of numbers.
Methylcyclopropane
1-ethyl-3-methylcyclopentane
NOT 1-ethyl-4-methylcyclopentane!!

•If there are three or more substituents, number the ring so as to give 
them the lowest set of numbers, and then list the substituents in 
alphabetical order. 
1,3-diethyl-4-methylcyclohexane
1,3,5-triethyl-2-methylcyclohexane

Sources of alkanes
•The three major sources of alkanes are: natural gas, coal, and 
petroleum oil (the three fossil fuels).
•Natural gas consists of approximately 90 -95% methane, 5-10% 
ethane, and a mixture of other relatively low-boiling alkanes.
•Through the process of thermal cracking, alkanes separated from 
these sources can be converted into unsaturated hydrocarbons (more 
useful).
•Catalytic cracking of alkanes takes place at lower temperatures, in the 
presence of catalysts.

•Petroleum oil is a thick viscous liquid containing a mixture of 
thousands of compounds, most of which are hydrocarbons.
•Petroleum, and petroleum-derived products fuel automobiles, trains, 
and aircrafts.
•They also provide greases and lubricants for machinery.
•In addition, petroleum and natural gas contribute 90% of the raw 
materials which are used in industry to make dyes, pharmaceuticals, 
perfumes, plastics, synthetic fibres, etc.

•But first, the petroleum must be refined.
•This complex mixture of hydrocarbons must be separated into 
fractions. This is achieved by fractional distillation.
Heated to temperatures as high 
as 370 to 425 °C.
Each fraction contains a mixture 
of hydrocarbons that boils at a 
specific range.



•Coal is mostly carbon (C).
•To make use of coal as a raw material for organic synthesis, steam is 
passed over the coal.
•This results in the formation of synthetic gas –a mixture of carbon 
monoxide and hydrogen.
•Synthetic gas can then be used to manufacture methanol and acetic 
acid:

Properties of Alkanes
•The most important property of alkanes and cycloalkanes is their 
almost complete lack of polarity –limits their reactivity.
•Their boiling points are generally lower than those of other 
compounds of similar molecular weight –weaker intermolecular 
forces.
•A branched alkane generally has a lower boiling point than the 
corresponding unbranched alkane of the same molecular weight.
•As branching increases, boiling point decreases.
•This is because as branching increases, the molecule becomes more 
compact, reducing surface area for intermolecular forces of 
attraction.

•Alkanes containing 1 to 4 carbons are gases at room temperature.
•Those containing 5 to 17 carbons are colorlessliquids.
•Those containing 18 carbons and above are waxy, white solids -for 
example, the petroleum jelly used in cosmetics which is a mixture of 
high-molecular weight alkanes.

Reaction mechanisms
•Reaction mechanisms show how bonds break and form in terms of 
the flow of electrons.
REVIEW LECTURES 7 AND 8 FROM CHEMISTRY I (LEWIS 
STRUCTURES, POLARITY, RESONANCE, ELECTRONEGATIVITY, 
AND MOLECULAR GEOMETRY)!!

Electronegativity
•Recall that electronegativity is the ability of an atom to attract 
electrons towards itself.
•The more electronegative an atom, the more it will draw electrons 
towards itself.
•Electronegativity increases from left to right of the periodic table.
•The halogens are the most electronegative elements in the periodic 
table.
•The atom/s in a molecule (usually carbon) that are bonded to an 
electronegative element are said to be electropositive –electron 
deficient. 

•More electronegative atom –represented by symbol δ-
•Electropositive atom –represented by symbol δ+
δ+
δ-
δ-
δ-
δ-
δ-
δ-
δ-
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
δ+
In these 
molecules the δ+ 
atoms are all 
carbons bonded 
to δ-atoms

•Lewis acids are species that can accepta pair of electrons to form 
new bonds.
•Because a Lewis acid accepts a pair of electrons, it is called an 
electrophile(electron lover). 
•Lewis bases are species that have a lone pair of electrons that can be 
donatedto form new bonds.
•A Lewis base is called a nucleophile(lover of nuclei) because it 
donates electrons to a nucleus with an empty, or easily vacated, 
orbital. 
A nucleophile donates electrons. It must have a lone 
pair of electrons.
An electrophile accepts electrons. It must be electron-
deficient.

•Common nucleophiles
In the case of H
2
O, the alcohols, and 
carboxylic acids, it is the oxygen 
which enables the molecule to act 
as a nucleophile due the lone pair 
of electrons.
Likewise for NH
3
and other 
Nitrogen-containing compounds, 
and sulphur-containing compounds.

Practice exercise 3:
a) For the following molecules, use the appropriate symbols to indicate 
electronegative atoms and electropositive atoms.
b) For each molecule, identify if it can act as a nucleophile, or an 
electrophile. 

•Chemists use curved arrows to show the movement of electrons 
between nucleophiles and electrophiles.
The curved arrow 
always starts at the 
nucleophile and 
points towards the 
electrophile.

•The curved arrow shows the flow of a pair of electrons from the 
nucleophile to the electrophile.
•It is this flow of electrons that causes bonds to form and to break.
•The movement of each pair of electrons involved in making or 
breaking bonds is indicated by its own separate arrow.

•For example:
•For this reaction, one curved arrow shows the transfer of a lone pair of 
electrons from oxygen to carbon to form a new O—C bond. Another curved 
arrow shows that the C—Cl bonding pair detaches from carbon (the bond 
breaks), and that pair of electrons becomes a lone pair on the Cl product. 
This is because carbon cannot form 5 bonds!

Homolyticand Heterolyticcleavage
•When a bond breaks heterolytically(heterolyticcleavage), one atom 
leaves with both electrons. This results in the formation of 
intermediate ions.
•When a bond breaks homolytically(homolyticcleavage), both atoms 
leave with one electron each. This results in the formation of radicals.
NB! Note the use of half-arrows. Half-
arrows are always used to indicate 
homolyticcleavage (formation of 
radicals)

Carbocationsand Carbanions
•Carbocationsand carbanions are formed when bonds split 
heterolytically.
•A carbocation is a species containing a positively charged carbon that 
is bonded to three other atoms.
•They have no non-bonding pairs of electrons. They only have six 
valence electrons and are therefore electron deficient.
•Hence powerful electrophiles.
‘’R’’represents any 
atom / group of 
atoms

•Carbocationsare stabilised by alkyl substituents through the 
inductive effect.
•The inductive effect is a donation of electron density from alkyl 
substituents through the sigma bond to the positively charged 
carbon.
•The more highly substituted the carbocation is, the more stable it will 
be. 
•Generally, the more stable a carbocation is the more favourable it will 
be (important to remember for reaction mechanisms).

‘R’ here represents any alkyl group

•Unsaturated carbocationsare also stabilised by the inductive effect 
and by resonance stabilisation.
•If a pi bond is adjacent to the positively charged carbon, the filled p 
orbitals of the pi bond can overlap with the empty p orbitals of the 
positive carbon.
•The result is a delocalised ion, with the positive charge being shared 
by two atoms. This is resonance delocalisation, and it is particularly 
effective at stabilising carbocations.

•A carbanion is a negatively charged species, containing a negatively 
charged carbon bonded to three other atoms.
•Carbanions form when bonds split heterolytically, and the carbon 
leaves with both electrons from the bond.
•They form when the carbon atom is bonded to a more electropositive 
atom (for example a metal).
δ+
δ-

•Carbanions are powerful nucleophiles.
•Contrary to carbocations, alkyl groups destabilisecarbanions through 
the inductive effect.
•This is because carbanions are already rich in electron density.

Free radicals
•When a bond splits homolytically, free radicals are formed.
•Free radicals are neutral species that contain one non-bonding 
electron.
•Just like carbocations, radicals are electron deficient since they lack a 
complete octet around the carbon. 
•Radicals are also stabilised by alkyl groups through the inductive 
effect.
•The more highly substituted the radical, the more stable it will be.



Reactivity of Alkanes
•Due to their almost complete lack of polarity, alkanes are the least 
reactive of the hydrocarbons.
•They will, however, undergo combustion in the presence of oxygen.
•Thus, commonly used as fuels.
•Alkanes can also undergo halogenation reactions –substitution of a 
hydrogen atom with a halogen.
•The reaction needs heat or light in order to take place.

•For example, chlorination of methane in the presence of heat or light;
•The reaction may continue to give different chloro-substituted 
products; heat (ΔH) or light (hν) is needed for each step

•Now let’s study the mechanism of the reaction.
•The halogenation of alkanes follows a free-radical chain reaction 
mechanism.
•This type of mechanism has three steps;
1)Initiation step: generates a reactive intermediate
2)Propagation step: in which the reactive molecule reacts with a 
stable molecule to form a product, and another reactive 
intermediate, allowing the chain to continue until the reactant 
supply is exhausted or the reactive intermediate is destroyed.
3)Termination step: reactions that destroy the reactive intermediate, 
allowing the reaction to stop.

1)The initiation step: generation of radicals
2) Propagation steps: 
Cl
2
molecule absorbs light, and splits homolytically
to form two highly reactive Cl radicals. Note the use 
of half-arrows!
A Cl radical abstracts (removes) a proton from CH
4
. 
the C-H bond splits homolytically, leaving one 
electron on the C of CH
4
forming methyl radical, and 
the other electron combines with Cl radical to form 
H—Cl.
Chlorine radical
The methyl radical reacts with a Cl
2
molecule, splitting the 
Cl—Cl bond. This generates another Cl radical that can 
repeat step 1. 
This chain of reactions continues until the supply of 
reactants is exhausted, or the reaction is terminated.

3) Termination step: slows or stops the chain reaction
This termination step becomes important towards the end of the 
reaction, when there are relatively few molecules of reactant present.
At this point, the free radicals are less likely to encounter a reactant 
molecule than they are to encounter each other. The chain reaction 
quickly stops. 
Reactive intermediate 
radicals are consumed; thus 
breaking the chain!
or
or

•Halogenation of alkanes containing three or more carbon atoms will 
result in a major and a minor product:
•Due to the higher stability of a secondary radical compared to a 
primary radical, the secondary chloride is more favoured (major 
product).
Minor product
40% yield
Major product
60% yield
<
More stableLess stable