





Veterinary Microbiology 
and Microbial Disease



Veterinary Microbiology 
and Microbial Disease
Second Edition
A John Wiley & Sons, Ltd., Publication
P.J. Quinn   MVB, PhD, MRCVS
Professor Emeritus, Former Professor of Veterinary Microbiology 
and Parasitology, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University College Dublin
B.K. Markey   MVB, PhD, Dip Stat, MRCVS
Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Microbiology, 
School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin
F.C. Leonard   MVB, PhD, MRCVS
Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Microbiology, 
School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin
E.S. FitzPatrick    FIBMS
Chief Technical Offi cer, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University College Dublin
S. Fanning    BSc,    PhD
Professor of Food Safety and Zoonoses, Director of Academic Centre 
for Food Safety, University College Dublin
P.J. Hartigan   BSc, MVM, MA, PhD, MRCVS
Former Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Pathology, 
Trinity College Dublin

This edition fi rst published 2011
© 2002 by Blackwell Science Ltd
© 2011 by P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning and P.J. Hartigan
Wiley-Blackwell is an imprint of John Wiley & Sons, formed by the merger of Wiley’s global Scientifi c, 
Technical and Medical business with Blackwell Publishing.
Registered offi ce:    John Wiley & Sons Ltd, The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
Editorial offi ces:    9600 Garsington Road, Oxford, OX4 2DQ, UK
 The Atrium, Southern Gate, Chichester, West Sussex, PO19 8SQ, UK
 2121 State Avenue, Ames, Iowa 50014-8300, USA
For details of our global editorial offi ces, for customer services and for information about 
how to apply for permission to reuse the copyright material in this book please see our website at 
www.wiley.com/wiley-blackwell.
The right of the author to be identifi ed as the author of this work has been asserted in accordance with 
the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or 
transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, 
except as permitted by the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act 1988, without the prior permission of 
the publisher.
Designations used by companies to distinguish their products are often claimed as trademarks. All brand 
names and product names used in this book are trade names, service marks, trademarks or registered 
trademarks of their respective owners. The publisher is not associated with any product or vendor 
mentioned in this book. This publication is designed to provide accurate and authoritative information in 
regard to the subject matter covered. It is sold on the understanding that the publisher is not engaged in 
rendering professional services. If professional advice or other expert assistance is required, the services 
of a competent professional should be sought.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Veterinary microbiology and microbial disease / P.J. Quinn, MVB, PhD, MRCVS, Professor Emeritus, Former 
Professor of Veterinary Microbiology and Parasitology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University College, 
Dublin, B.K. Markey, MVB, PhD, Dip Stat, MRCVS, Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Microbiology, School of 
Veterinary Medicine, University College, Dublin, F.C. Leonard, MVB, PhD, MRCVS, Senior Lecturer in 
Veterinary Microbiology, School of Veterinary Medicine, University College, Dublin, E.S. FitzPatrick, FIBMS, 
Chief Technical Officer, School of Veterinary Medicine, University College, Dublin, S. Fanning, BSc, PhD, 
Professor of Food Safety and Zoonoses, Director of Academic Centre for Food Safety, University College 
Dublin, P.J. Hartigan, BSc, MVM, MA, PhD, MRCVS, Former Senior Lecturer in Veterinary Pathology, Trinity 
College, Dublin. – Second Edition.
            p.    ;    cm.
    Includes bibliographical references and index.
        ISBN 978-1-4051-5823-7 (pbk. : alk. paper)    1.  Veterinary microbiology.    I.  Quinn, P. J. (Patrick J.), 
author.    II.  Markey, B. K. (Bryan K.), author.    III.  Leonard, F. C., author.    IV.  FitzPatrick, E. S., author. 
V.  Fanning, S., author.    VI.  Hartigan, P. J., author.
    [DNLM:    1.    Microbiology.    2.    Veterinary    Medicine.    3.    Communicable    Diseases–microbiology.    
4.  Communicable Diseases–veterinary. QW 70]
    SF780.2.V485    2011
    636.089'69041–dc22
 2010049404
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.
Set in 10/12 pt Palatino by Toppan Best-set Premedia Limited, Hong Kong
1    2011

Contents
v
Preface                                                                            ix
Acknowledgements                                                       x
Author biographies xi
Section I    Introduction to Microbiology, 
Infection, Immunity and Molecular 
Diagnostic Methods
1 Microbiology, microbial pathogens 
and infectious disease 3
2      Subdivisions,      classifi cation and 
morphological characterization of 
infectious agents 7
3 Infection and immunity 14
4      Immunodefi ciency diseases 67
5 Vaccines and vaccination 80
6 Molecular diagnostic methods 95
Section II    Introductory Bacteriology
7 The structure of bacterial cells 115
8 Cultivation, preservation and 
inactivation of bacteria 123
9 Bacterial genetics, mechanisms of 
genetic variation and gene databases 129
10    Laboratory diagnosis of bacterial disease 143
11    Antibacterial    agents    149
12    Antibacterial    resistance    157
13    Bacterial colonization, tissue 
invasion and clinical disease 165
Section III    Pathogenic Bacteria
14 Staphylococcus species                                                179
15    Streptococci    188
16 Actinobacteria                                                               196
17 Corynebacterium species 207
18    Rhodococcus    equi                                                          213
19 Listeria species 217
20 Erysipelothrix rhusiopathiae                                        222
21 Bacillus species 227
22 Clostridium species                                                     233
23 Mycobacterium species 250
24 Enterobacteriaceae                                                        263
25 Pseudomonas aeruginosa and 
Burkholderia species 287
26 Actinobacillus species                                                 293
27 Pasteurella species, Mannheimia 
haemolytica and Bibersteinia trehalosi                        300
28 Francisella tularensis                                                   309
29 Histophilus somni, Haemophilus parasuis 
and Avibacterium paragallinarum                              314
30 Taylorella species                                                         321
31 Bordetella species 325
32 Moraxella species                                                        330
33 Brucella species 334
34 Campylobacter and Helicobacter species                   342
35 Lawsonia intracellularis                                               351
36    Spirochaetes    354
37    Pathogenic anaerobic non-spore-forming 
Gram-negative bacteria 367
38    Mycoplasmas    373
39 Chlamydia and Chlamydophila species 384
40 Rickettsiales and Coxiella burnetii                              394
41    Bacterial species of limited 
pathogenic signifi cance 405
Section IV    Mycology
42    General features of fungi associated 
with disease in animals 413
43    Dermatophytes    419
44 Aspergillus species                                                      425
45    Yeasts and disease production 430
46    Dimorphic    fungi    439
47    Zygomycetes of veterinary importance 446
48    Fungus-like organisms of 
veterinary importance 452
49 Pneumocystis carinii                                                    457
50    Opportunistic infections caused 
predominantly by phaeoid fungi 459
51    Mycotoxins and mycotoxicoses 463
52    Pathogenic algae and cyanobacteria 478
53    Antifungal    chemotherapy    483
Section V    Introductory Virology
54    Nature, structure and taxonomy of viruses 505
55    Replication of viruses 514
56    Genetics and evolution of viruses 522
57    Propagation of viruses and virus–cell 
interactions                                                                  527
58    Pathogenesis of viral diseases 534
59    Laboratory diagnosis of viral infections 541
60    Antiviral    chemotherapy    548
Section VI    Viruses and Prions
61 Herpesviridae                                                                567
62 Papillomaviridae                                                           583
63 Adenoviridae                                                                 588
64 Poxviridae                                                                     593
65 Asfarviridae                                                                  603
66 Parvoviridae                                                                  607

vi  Contents
67 Circoviridae                                                                  615
68 Retroviridae                                                                  618
69 Reoviridae                                                                     635
70 Birnaviridae                                                                  644
71 Orthomyxoviridae                                                        647
72    Paramyxoviridae                                                           656
73 Rhabdoviridae                                                               668
74 Bornaviridae                                                                 676
75    Bunyaviridae                                                                679
76 Picornaviridae                                                               684
77 Caliciviridae                                                                  692
78 Astroviridae                                                                  698
79 Coronaviridae                                                               700
80 Arteriviridae                                                                 713
81 Flaviviridae                                                                   718
82 Togaviridae                                                                    729
83    Prions: unconventional infectious agents 734
Section VII    Microbial Agents and 
Disease Production
84    Tissue and system preferences of bacterial, 
fungal and viral pathogens and the nature 
of the diseases caused by these 
infectious agents 745
85    Interactions of microbial pathogens 
with the nervous system 759
86    Interactions of microbial pathogens 
with the male and female 
reproductive systems 765
87    The role of microbial pathogens 
in intestinal disease 773
88    The role of microbial pathogens 
in respiratory disease 778
89    Interactions of microbial pathogens 
with the renal system 787
90    Microbial diseases of the 
cardiovascular system 797
91    Interactions of microbial pathogens 
with the musculoskeletal system 806
92    The role of microbial pathogens in 
diseases of the integumentary system 826
93    Bacterial causes of bovine mastitis 837
94    Disinfection, biosecurity and other 
aspects of disease control 851
Appendix: Relevant websites 890
Index                                                                            893
Additional resources for lecturers are available on the supporting companion website at:
www.wiley.com/go/quinn/veterinarymicrobiology

   This book is dedicated to the memory of  
  Margery  E.  Carter  
  and  
  W.J.C. (Bill) Donnelly, co - authors of the fi  rst  edition       



ix
  The pace of change in microbiology has accelerated in recent years as molecular techniques, applied to microbial 
pathogens, elucidate the pathogenesis of many infectious diseases and improve the reliability of diagnostic test 
procedures.  Today,  microbiology  occupies  a  central  position  in  the  veterinary  curriculum  and  has  developed  
into  a  subject  of  vast  complexity.  Since  the  publication  of    Veterinary  Microbiology  and  Microbial  Disease   in  2002,  
many changes have occurred in veterinary microbiology, some on the recommendations of international com-
mittees and others as a consequence of relevant research. 
 The  second  edition  of  our  book  incorporates  changes  in  individual  chapters  which  have  been  updated  and  
expanded. In addition, new chapters on immunodefi ciency diseases, vaccines and vaccination, molecular diag-
nostic  methods,  antibacterial  resistance,  antifungal  chemotherapy,  antiviral  chemotherapy  and  microbial  dis-
eases  of  the  urinary  tract,  cardiovascular  system,  musculoskeletal  system  and  the  integumentary  system  have  
been added. 
 This edition is divided into seven sections. The fi rst section provides an introduction to microbiology, infec-
tion,  immunity  and  molecular  diagnostic  methods.  Section  II  contains  chapters  on  introductory  bacteriology.  
Pathogenic bacteria are dealt with in Section III. The twelve chapters in Section IV are concerned with mycology. 
Introductory virology is presented in Section V. Viruses and prions are covered in Section VI. The fi nal section, 
Section VII, includes chapters on the interactions of microbial pathogens with body systems. A separate chapter 
in this section deals with bovine mastitis and the fi nal chapter provides a comprehensive review of disinfection, 
biosecurity and other aspects of disease control. 
 To facilitate readers requiring additional information on topics included in the book, a list of websites is pro-
vided at the end of Section VII. 
 The use of colour in this edition enhances the quality of the illustrations and facilitates the interpretation of 
complex diagrams. 
 The authors would be pleased to receive notifi cation of errors or inaccuracies in this edition of our book.      
 Preface     

x
  We wish to acknowledge the constructive comments of the following colleagues who offered scientifi c, technical 
and editorial advice on individual chapters or who assisted in other ways: Hester McAllister, Marijka Beltman, 
Aidan  Kelly,  Paul  Stanley,  Carolyn  Cummins,  Eva  Maischberger,  Jane  Irwin,  Robert  Shiel,  Clodagh  Kearney,  
Gr  á  inne  McCarthy,  Hanne  Jahns,  Joe  Cassidy,  Yvonne  Abbott,  Dores  Maguire,  Frances  LeMatti,  Ruth  Henry,  
Pauline  Coyle,  Sean  Hogan,  Jarlath  Nally,  Steve  Gordon,  Brian  Sheahan,  Mark  Rogers,  Shane  Cooney,  Orla  
Condell, Marta Martins, Matthew McCusker, Stephen O ’ Brien, Katie Solomon, Karen Power, Paul Whyte, Patrick 
Wall and Theo De Waal, School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin; Cliona O ’ Farrelly, Tim Foster 
and  Patrick  Prendergast,  Trinity  College  Dublin;  Pat  Lenihan,  Maire  McElroy,  Kevin  Kenny,  Peter  O  ’  Neill  and  
Pat  Raleigh,  Central  Veterinary  Research  Laboratory,  Backweston;  Patrick  Rogan,  Department  of  Agriculture,  
Fisheries and Food; Hywel Ball, Agri - Food and Biosciences Institute, Stormont; Patrick McDonough, College of 
Veterinary  Medicine,  Cornell  University;  Helen  O  ’  Shea,  Department  of  Biological  Sciences,  Cork  Institute  of  
Technology; Alan Reilly and Wayne Anderson, Food Safety Authority of Ireland; Brendan Crowley, Department 
of Medical Microbiology, St. James ’ s Hospital, Dublin; Donal Walsh, School of Veterinary Medicine, University 
of California, Davis; Ross Fitzgerald, Universitry of Edinburgh; Davida Smyth, NewYork University; Clive Lee, 
Royal College of Surgeons in Ireland; James Buckley, Veterinary Department, Cork County Council. 
 The facilities and support provided by the librarian, Mr. Diarmuid Stokes, and staff at the veterinary library, 
Paul  Gogarty,  Michelle  Latimer,  Vanessa  Buckley,  Kathryn  Smith  and  Marie  McGourn  is  acknowledged  with  
gratitude. 
 Justinia Wood, Nick Morgan, Lucy Nash and their colleagues at Wiley - Blackwell provided advice and assist-
ance throughout this long project. The careful editing of the manuscript by Mary Sayers, copy editor, improved 
the  accuracy  of  the  text,  illustrations  and  references.  As  Project  Manager,  Ruth  Swan  coordinated  corrections  
and advised the authors on technical aspects of changes to the manuscript. 
   Dublin,  July  2011        
 Acknowledgements     

xi
   P.J.  Quinn ,  MVB,  PhD,  MRCVS,  was  Professor  of  Veterinary  Microbiology  and  Parasitology  and  Head  of  the  
Department in the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, from 1985 to 2002. After graduat-
ing  from  University  College  Dublin  in  1965,  he  spent  some  time  in  veterinary  practice  before  enrolling  as  a  
postgraduate student in Ontario Veterinary College, University of Guelph, Canada. In 1970, he was awarded a 
PhD  for  research  in  veterinary  immunology  and  he  remained  on  the  staff  of  Ontario  Veterinary  College  until  
his return to the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, in 1973. 
 His research interests have included allergic skin reactions in the horse to biting insects, the epidemiology of 
toxoplasmosis  in  sheep,  immune  mechanisms  in  the  respiratory  tract  of  calves,  leptospirosis  in  dairy  cattle,  
immunomodulation, mechanisms of immunity in the respiratory tract of specifi  c pathogen - free and conventional 
cats,  botulism  in  gulls  around  the  Irish  coastline,  factors  infl  uencing  the  tuberculin  test  in  cattle,  airborne  dis-
persal  of  bacteria  during  slurry  spreading,  and  evaluation  of  the  effi  cacy  of  chemical  disinfectants  against  
 Brucella abortus  and  Mycobacterium bovis.  
 In addition to many refereed publications in journals and chapters in books, he edited  Cell - mediated  Immunity  
(1984),  is  senior  co  - author  of    Animal  Diseases  Exotic  to  Ireland   (1992),    Clinical  Veterinary  Microbiology    (1994), 
 Microbial and Parasitic Diseases of the Dog and Cat  (1997),  Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease  (2002) and 
 Concise Review of Veterinary Microbiology  (2003) and is co - author of  Veterinary Embryology   (2006). 
 He was awarded the title Professor Emeritus by University College Dublin in 2002. In 2006, he was recipient 
of the Association of Veterinary Teachers and Research Workers outstanding teaching award. For his contribu-
tion to teaching and faculty development in the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine in Tirana, he was awarded an 
honorary doctorate by the Agricultural University of Tirana, Albania, in May 2010. 
  Bryan K. Markey , MVB, PhD, MRCVS, Dip Stat, graduated from the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University 
College  Dublin,  in  1985.  Following  a  short  period  in  general  practice  he  was  appointed  house  surgeon  in  the  
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin. In 1986, he joined the academic staff as an assistant 
lecturer  in  the  Department  of  Veterinary  Microbiology  and  Parasitology.  He  spent  one  year  on  study  leave  at  
the Veterinary Sciences Division, Belfast, and enrolled for a PhD degree at Queen ’ s University. He was awarded 
a PhD from Queen ’ s University, Belfast in 1991 and was promoted to senior lecturer in veterinary microbiology 
in 1997. From 2002 to 2004 he served as Head of Department. In 2005 he was visiting professor at the College 
of Life Sciences, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane. 
 His research interests include chlamydial infections of domestic animals and methicillin - resistant  Staphylococcus 
aureus    infection  in  veterinary  species.  He  has  contributed  chapters  to  books  on  veterinary  disinfection  and  is  
co - author  of   Animal Diseases Exotic to Ireland  (1992),  Clinical Veterinary Microbiology  (1994),  Microbial and Parasitic 
Diseases  of  the  Dog  and  Cat   (1997),    Veterinary  Microbiology  and  Microbial  Disease   (2002)  and    Concise  Review  of  
Veterinary Microbiology   (2003). 
  Finola C. Leonard , MVB, PhD, MRCVS, graduated from the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College 
Dublin,  in  1983.  She  was  house  surgeon  in  the  Department  of  Large  Animal  Medicine,  Royal  (Dick)  School  of  
Veterinary Studies, Edinburgh, for one year and engaged in veterinary practice for three years. She commenced 
postgraduate studies in the Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, on leptospirosis in dairy 
cattle while based at Teagasc, Moorepark, Co. Cork, and was awarded a PhD for research on this topic in 1991. 
She remained in Moorepark as a postdoctoral research worker until 1997. Her research was concerned with foot 
lameness in dairy cattle and the infl uence of housing on the behaviour and welfare of cattle and pigs. 
  She  was  appointed  college  lecturer  in  the  Department  of  Veterinary  Microbiology  and  Parasitology  in  the  
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin in 1997 and was promoted to senior lecturer in vet-
erinary  microbiology  in  2002.  Her  research  interests  include    Salmonella    infection  in  pigs,  other  zoonotic  infec-
tions,  and  antimicrobial  resistance,  including  methicillin  - resistant    Staphylococcus  aureus   infection  in  farm  and  
companion animals. 
  Eamonn S. FitzPatrick , FIBMS, was awarded Fellowship of the Institute of Biomedical Science in 1978 and was 
appointed  to  the  post  of  Principal  Technician  in  the  Department  of  Veterinary  Anatomy,  University  College  
 Author biographies     

xii  Author biographies
Dublin.  He  was  appointed  to  the  Histopathology  Advisory  Committee  of  the  Irish  Academy  of  Medical  
Laboratory Sciences in 1979. From 1987 to 1989 he was External Examiner for the Diploma in Medical Laboratory 
Science — Histopathology Option, at the Dublin Institute of Technology, where he also lectured for many years 
on  electron  microscopy  in  the  Medical  Laboratory  Sciences  Degree  course.  He  was  appointed  Chief  Technical  
Offi cer in the Veterinary Science Unit of the School of Veterinary Medicine, University College Dublin, in 2006. 
He has been teaching veterinary anatomy and histology for over 25 years. 
 Recent published work includes papers on hormone receptors in the bovine reproductive tract and the effect 
of diet supplements on the alimentary tracts of weanling pigs. His current research interests are centred mainly 
on  mucins,  mucus  gels  and  the  interaction  of  microbial  pathogens  with  epithelial  surfaces,  especially  of  the  
bovine and equine reproductive tracts. He is co - author of  Veterinary Embryology   (2006). 
  S é amus  Fanning  ,  BSc,  PhD,  graduated  in  Biochemistry  and  Microbiology  from  University  College  Cork.  He  
was  awarded  a  Fulbright  Fellowship  in  1995  and  worked  at  Baylor  College  of  Medicine,  Houston.  In  2002  he  
was appointed as the Professor of Food Safety and Zoonoses at University College Dublin and set up the UCD 
Centre  for  Food  Safety.  Currently,  his  research  interests  include  the  application  of  molecular  methods  to  food  
safety to aid in the control of zoonotic bacteria. A signifi cant part of his research is related to the characterization 
of the genetic mechanisms contributing to the emergence of multiple drug resistance in food - borne pathogens. 
In particular, this work is related to strain virulence and its infl uence on survival in the food chain. His research 
group is involved in characterizing the emerging pathogen,  Cronobacter  species (formerly known as  Enterobacter 
sakazakii ), linked to powdered infant milk formula. The UCD Centre for Food Safety was designated as the World 
Health Organization (WHO) Collaborating Centre for Research, Reference and Training on  Cronobacter . 
  Patrick  J.  Hartigan ,  BSc,  MVM,  MA,  PhD,  MRCVS,  graduated  from  the  Veterinary  College  of  Ireland  in  1955.  
After  a  decade  in  large  animal  practice  in  Co.  Kerry,  he  registered  as  a  graduate  student  at  the  School  of  
Veterinary  Medicine,  Trinity  College,  Dublin.  His  studies  on  uterine  pathology  in  repeat  breeder  cows  were  
rewarded  with  a  PhD  in  1970.  After  10  years  as  a  pathologist  in  the  School  of  Veterinary  Medicine,  he  moved  
to a post as Senior Lecturer in Reproductive Physiology at the Department of Physiology in the Faculty of Health 
Sciences  at  Trinity  College,  where  he  remained  until  retirement.  At  present,  he  is  a  Research  Associate  in  the  
Department  of  Physiology.      

Section I
  Section I 
Introduction to Microbiology, 
Infection, Immunity and 
Molecular Diagnostic Methods     



SECTION I
3
     The earliest forms of life on this planet are presumed 
to have had characteristics resembling those of bacte-
ria, most likely anaerobic bacteria. It is postulated that 
prokaryotes evolved from primitive forms of life and 
that  the  subsequent  availability  of  oxygen  resulting  
from  photosynthesis  contributed  to  microbial  diver-
sity.   The   chronological   sequence   of   evolutionary   
events relating to the emergence of microbial life and, 
subsequently,  eukaryotic  cells  is  outlined  in  Fig.    1.1  .  
This  proposed  scheme  is  based  on  limited  factual  
information, some deriving from information gleaned 
from  fossilized  remains  of  prokaryotic  cells  approxi-
mately  3.5  billion  years  old  and  also  from  studies  of  
ribosomal RNA among microorganisms.   
  Before  the  causes  of  infectious  diseases  could  be  
discussed and evaluated in a rational manner, events 
associated  with  the  emergence  of  life  forms  required  
explanation.  Traditional  views  on  the  origin  of  life  
were  strongly  infl  uenced  by  the  writings  of  classical  
Greek and Roman scholars, many of whom espoused 
the  view  of  spontaneous  generation  of  small  living  
entities.  Disease  was  often  attributed  to  evil  forces  
associated with disturbances in the upper atmosphere, 
poisonous   vapours   called   miasmas,   supernatural   
events   and   other   infl   uences   unrelated   to   biology.   
Awareness of the possible existence of forms of life not 
visible  to  the  naked  eye  emerged  slowly.  As  early  as  
1546, in his treatise  De Contagione , Girolamo Fracastoro 
suggested  that  animate  agents  were  responsible  for  
disease.  Concepts  of  infectious  diseases  were  closely  
related to the demonstration of organisms too small to 
be  observed  without  magnifi  cation  and  to  the  isola-
tion  and  characterization  of  these  small  organisms,  
termed    microorganisms.    Major    developments    in    
microbiology,   the   study   of   these   microorganisms,   
began with theories relating to the causes of infectious 
  Chapter 1 
Microbiology,  m icrobial 
 p athogens and 
 i nfectious  d isease         
diseases   and   continued   with   the   development   of   
microscopy,  which  confi  rmed  the  existence  of  micro-
organisms  visible  only  by  substantial  magnifi cation. 
Towards the middle of the nineteenth century, the pio-
neering work of Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch con-
fi  rmed  the  microbial  aetiology  of  infectious  diseases.  
Progressive  developments  contributed  to  the  rapid  
expansion  of  knowledge  and  the  establishment  of  
microbiology  as  a  subject  of  major  importance  not  
only  in  human  and  animal  health  but  also  in  food  
processing and preservation. 
  Spontaneous  generation  as  an  explanation  for  the  
emergence of life from decaying organic matter was a 
commonly held view for many centuries. It was pos-
tulated that life began as a consequence of putrefaction 
or some other associated change in organic matter. A 
number of practical experiments aimed at testing this 
concept were carried out, often with equivocal results. 
Improved scientifi c methodology and the availability 
of  suitable  instrumentation  gradually  challenged  the  
acceptance  of  spontaneous  generation.  The  develop-
ment of the microscope around 1600 offered a means 
of  exploring  minute  living  entities,  and  the  amateur  
Dutch  scientist,  Antonie  van  Leeuwenhoek,  took  a  
keen  interest  in  the  examination  of  water,  fl uids and 
organic material. In fl uids he observed large numbers 
of motile structures, not visible to the naked eye, which 
he  called    ‘  animalcules  ’  .  In  1675,  van  Leeuwenhoek  
recorded the structures he observed, which were prob-
ably  bacteria,  yeasts  and  protozoa.  However,  van  
Leeuwenhoek ’ s discovery of microorganisms did not 
resolve the issue of spontaneous generation. 
 The occurrence of maggots on putrefying meat was 
taken  as  evidence  of  spontaneous  generation.  The  
Italian   physician   and   naturalist   Francesco   Reddi   
(1626  –  1697)  carried  out  relevant  experiments  on  this  
Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease, Second Edition. P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning, 
P.J. Hartigan.
© 2011 P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning and P.J. Hartigan. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

4  Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease
SECTION I
morphologically from brewers’ yeast was responsible 
for  the  spoilage.  He  deduced  that  both  alcoholic  and  
lactic fermentation resulted from the metabolism and 
replication of the living yeast cells. The solution to the 
spoilage  problem  during  fermentation  of  wine  and  
beer products lay in heating the raw materials to about 
120 ° F  (49  ° C)  in  order  to  kill  contaminating  microor-
ganisms prior to the addition of the appropriate yeast 
cells.  This  process,  now  known  as  pasteurization,  is  
widely  used  to  reduce  microbial  contamination  in  
order to prolong the shelf - life of milk and some other 
foods. 
  Pasteur  effectively  ended  the  controversy  about  
spontaneous  generation  through  defi nitive confi rma-
tion  of  Spallanzani  ’  s  experiments.  Furthermore,  he  
demonstrated  that  contamination  of  nutrient  broth  
when exposed to air resulted from microorganisms in 
dust particles settling on the fl uid. 
 An  important  technical  advance,  which  stemmed  
from Pasteur ’ s fermentation studies, was the develop-
ment  of  a  fl  uid  medium  suitable  for  culturing  yeast  
cells.  He  then  developed  other  liquid  media  contain-
ing  specifi  c  ingredients  that  favoured  the  growth  of  
particular  pathogenic  bacteria.  It  was  this  develop-
ment which eventually allowed him to formulate the 
germ  theory  of  disease.  The  germ  theory  formed  the  
topic  and  demonstrated  that  maggots  developed  in  
meat  only  when  fl  ies  laid  their  eggs  on  it.  In  the  
mid - eighteenth  century,  the  English  naturalist  John  
Needham  investigated  the  effect  of  boiling  broth  on  
the  survival  of  microorganisms.  He  claimed  to  have  
detected microorganisms in boiled broth several days 
later.    Needham    ’    s    experimental    procedures    were    
shown subsequently to have been unreliable. In 1769, 
Lazzaro Spallanzani repeated Needham ’ s experiments 
and  demonstrated  that  no  organisms  survived  in  
broth boiled for 1   hour. Needham argued that air was 
essential for all life and that Spallanzani had excluded 
air  from  the  fl  asks  containing  broth.  As  a  defi ned 
branch  of  science,  microbiology  could  not  advance  
until the concept of spontaneous generation was dis-
proved.   When   the   French   chemist   Louis   Pasteur   
(1822  –  1895)  became  involved  in  investigations  relat-
ing to microbiology, his careful planning and intuitive 
understanding  of  biology  brought  a  new  energy  and  
appropriate methodology which conclusively refuted 
the  prevailing  theories  of  spontaneous  generation.  
Pasteur   ’   s   interest   in   spontaneous   generation   was   
prompted by experiments which he had conducted on 
spoilage  during  the  fermentation  of  beet  alcohol.  He  
showed  that  a  contaminating  yeast  that  produced  
lactic  acid  during  fermentation  and  which  differed  
     Figure 1.1     Chronological sequence of biological events from the formation of Earth, relating to the evolution of different forms of microbial 
life and, later, eukaryotic cells. Although supporting scientifi c evidence documenting the earliest forms of microbial life is not currently 
available, data from microfossils confi rm the existence of organisms resembling cyanobacteria approximately 3.5 billion years ago.  
Formation of Earth,
estimated to be
4.6 billion years ago
2.5 billion years ago
1.5 billion years ago
0.5 billion years ago
3.5 billion years ago
4 billion years ago
Present
Emergence of primitive
forms of life which had
no dependence on oxygen
Organisms resembling
primitive bacteria
Cyanobacteria and
related organisms
Eukaryotic cells
Diverse forms of
early animal life
Mammals

Microbiology, microbial pathogens and infectious disease    5
SECTION I
such  serious  infectious  diseases  as  rabies,  smallpox,  
foot  -  and  -  mouth  disease  and  rinderpest.  Despite  the  
absence  of  specifi  c  knowledge  about  the  aetiology  of  
these  diseases,  successful  vaccines  were  introduced  
both  for  smallpox,  by  Edward  Jenner  in  the  late  
eighteenth century, and for rabies, by Pasteur and his 
associates  in  the  latter  half  of  the  nineteenth  century.  
The  development  by  Pasteur  ’  s  co  -  worker,  Charles  
Chamberland, of the porcelain fi lter to produce bacte-
riologically - sterile  water  for  use  in  culture  media,  
eventually facilitated isolation of the fi lterable agents 
which  caused  viral  diseases.  Remarkably,  the  tech-
nique  was  fi  rst  used  to  elucidate  the  cause  of  a  plant  
viral disease, tobacco mosaic disease. 
 Dmitri  Ivanovsky,  a  Russian  scientist,  reported  in  
1892  that  it  was  possible  to  transmit  tobacco  mosaic  
disease  from  diseased  to  healthy  plants  using  fi l-
tered   leaf   extract   as   inoculum.   The   fi lters   used 
by   Ivanovsky   were   Chamberland   porcelain   fi lters 
designed  to  remove  bacteria  from  drinking  water.  In  
1898,  Martinus  Beijerinck,  unaware  of  the  work  of  
Ivanovsky,  also  demonstrated  the  fi  lterability  of  the  
agent  of  tobacco  mosaic  disease.  Moreover,  he  real-
ized  that  the  disease  could  not  be  due  to  a  toxin  as  
the fi ltered sap from infected plants could be used for 
serial  transmission  of  the  disease  without  loss  of  
potency. In the same year, Loeffl er and Frosch identi-
fi  ed  the  fi rst  fi  lterable  agent  from  animals,  the  virus  
of foot - and - mouth disease. Yellow fever virus, a fi lter-
able  agent  pathogenic  for  humans,  was  described  by  
Walter Reed and his team in 1901. Ellerman and Bang, 
in  1908,  demonstrated  the  oncogenic  potential  of  a  
fi  lterable  agent,  the  cause  of  avian  leukosis.  In  1915,  
Frederick  Twort  observed  that  bacteria  were  suscep-
tible  to  a  fi  lterable  agent,  and  two  years  later  Felix  
d ’ Herelle   made   a   similar   observation.   D   ’ Herelle 
named  these  viruses    ‘  bacteriophages  ’    and  developed  
a  technique  for  establishing  their  concentration  in  
active  preparations.  Bacteriophages  have  proved  to  
be  particularly  useful  in  studies  on  viral  replication  
and  bacterial  genetics.  
  Initially,  the  only  method  available  for  recovering  
large quantities of virus was through infecting suscep-
tible  animals.  In  1913  Steinhardt  and  his  colleagues  
succeeded  in  growing  vaccinia  virus  in  explants  of  
guinea - pig cornea embedded in clotted plasma. Some 
20 years later, Furth and Sturmia used mice as a host 
species  for  propagating  viruses,  while  Woodruff  and  
Goodpasture were successful in propagating fowlpox 
virus  on  the  chorioallantoic  membrane  of  embryo-
nated  eggs.  A  major  advance  was  made  in  the  early  
1950s  with  the  development  of  single  cell  cultures.  
Factors critical in this development included the avail-
ability  of  antibiotics  to  control  bacterial  contamina-
tion, and the use of trypsin to obtain cell suspensions 
basis for Pasteur ’ s experiments on vaccination against 
fowl cholera, anthrax and rabies. An additional practi-
cal  application  of  the  theory  was  the  introduction  of  
phenol as a disinfectant for surgical procedures by the 
British surgeon Joseph Lister. 
 Together with Pasteur, the German physician Robert 
Koch  is  considered  to  be  a  co  - founder  of  modern  
microbiology. Having observed bacilli in the blood of 
animals  that  had  died  from  anthrax,  Koch  demon-
strated their pathogenicity by injecting mice with the 
blood.  The  injected  mice  died  and  the  bacilli  were  
present in preparations from their swollen spleens. He 
was  also  able  to  transfer  the  infection  from  mouse  to  
mouse  and  to  demonstrate  the  bacilli  in  each  newly  
infected  mouse.  Initially,  Koch  used  blood  serum  for  
growing the anthrax bacillus  in vitro . Later, he devel-
oped solid media which allowed isolation of individ-
ual  bacterial  colonies.  Using  a  solid  medium,  he  was  
eventually able to isolate the tubercle bacillus from the 
tissues  of  an  experimental  animal  in  which  he  had  
demonstrated   microscopically   the   presence   of   the   
organism. As a result of these observations, Koch for-
mulated  certain  principles  for  proving  that  a  specifi c 
microorganism  caused  a  particular  disease  (Box    1.1 ). 
Pasteur ’ s  germ  theory  of  disease  and  Koch  ’ s  postu-
lates are the two cornerstones on which microbiology 
is  based  and  without  which  this  branch  of  biology  
could not have advanced.   
 By  the  end  of  the  nineteenth  century  a  number  of  
important  infectious  diseases  had  been  confi rmed as 
bacterial in origin. Both Pasteur and Koch contributed 
to  the  identifi  cation  and  confi  rmation  of  the  causal  
agent  of  anthrax.  Pasteur  demonstrated  that  fowl  
cholera,  malignant  oedema  and  suppurative  lesions  
were  each  associated  with  a  specifi  c  bacterial  infec-
tion.  The  causative  organisms  of  tuberculosis  and  
typhoid fever were recognized by Koch and his associ-
ates.  Other  bacterial  agents  responsible  for  serious  
infectious  diseases  including  glanders,  gas  gangrene,  
diphtheria and dysentery were isolated by laboratory 
scientists in Europe, North America and Japan. 
 The   basic   technical   approaches,   pioneered   by   
Pasteur and Koch, failed to shed light on the causes of 
  Box 1.1    Koch ’ s postulates 
        •            The  pathogenic  microorganism  must  be  present  in  every  
case of the disease but absent from healthy animals  
   •        The suspected microorganism must be isolated and grown 
in pure culture  
  
 •        
  The  same  disease  must  occur  when  the  isolated  microor-
ganism is injected into healthy susceptible animals  
  
 •        
 The same microorganisms must be isolated again from the 
injected animals which developed disease     

6  Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease
SECTION I
(4)  the  diameter  of  the  nucleocapsid  (helical  viruses)  
or the number of capsomers (icosahedral viruses). The 
discovery of the enzyme reverse transcriptase in 1970 
by Temin and Baltimore helped to elucidate retrovirus 
replication and provided an essential tool for produc-
ing complementary DNA (cDNA). This ushered in the 
recombinant  DNA  revolution.  The  study  of  retrovi-
ruses   has   made   a   substantial   contribution   to   the   
advancement  of  basic  research  in  neoplasia  and  the  
role  of  oncogenes  in  the  emergence  of  malignant  
tumours. 
 During the past century, major developments have 
taken  place  in  microbiological  concepts,  techniques  
and applications. Modern microbiology encompasses 
the  study  of  bacteria,  fungi,  viruses  and  other  micro-
scopic  and  submicroscopic  organisms  (Fig.    1.2  ).  In  
veterinary microbiology, emphasis is placed on those 
microorganisms associated with infectious diseases of 
animals.  Immunology,  the  study  of  host  responses  to  
infectious  agents,  is  a  discipline  closely  related  to  
microbiology  and  is  sometimes  considered  a  distinct  
but  cognate  subject.    
  Further  r eading 
    Dunlop ,   R.H.    and    Williams ,   D.J.    ( 1996 ).   Veterinary Medicine: 
An Illustrated History .   Mosby ,   St.  Louis,  Missouri .  
    Frankland ,    P.     and     Frankland ,    P.     ( 1901 ).    Pasteur .    Cassell , 
 London .  
    Lechevalier ,   H.A.    and    Solotorovsky ,   M.    ( 1965 ).   Three Centuries 
of Microbiology .   McGraw - Hill ,   New  York .  
    Pelczar ,   M.J.  ,    Chan ,   E.C.S.    and    Krieg ,   N.R.    ( 1993 ).   Microbiology 
Concepts and Applications .   McGraw - Hill ,   New  York .  
    Porter ,    R.     ( 1999 ).    The  Greatest  Benefi  t  to  Mankind .    Fontana , 
 London .  
    Prescott ,   L.M.  ,    Harley ,   J.P.    and    Klein ,   D.A.    ( 2002 ).   Microbiology . 
 Fifth  Edition .   McGraw - Hill ,   New  York .  
    van    Regenmortel  ,    M.H.V.    ( 1990 ).   Virus  species,  a  much  over-
looked   but   essential   concept   in   virus   classifi cation . 
 Intervirology ,   31 ,   241  –  254 .   
   
  
from  embryonic  or  adult  tissue.  The  separated  cells  
could then be grown as monolayers on glass surfaces. 
Continuous  cell  lines,  capable  of  multiplying  indefi -
nitely,  provided  a  reliable  source  of  cells  for  virus  
cultivation. 
  In  1887  Buist  observed  vaccinia  virus  using  a  light  
microscope.  However,  because  of  the  limited  resolv-
ing power of this type of microscopy, the structure of 
the virus was not discernible. In 1939 Kausche and his 
co - workers   employed   the   newly - developed   electron 
microscope and a metal shadowing technique to iden-
tify  tobacco  mosaic  virus  in  purifi ed  preparations. 
Ultrastructural    studies    of    viruses    were    greatly    
expanded and enhanced in the 1950s by the develop-
ment  of  negative  staining  and  methods  for  cutting  
ultrathin  sections.  X  -  ray  diffraction  methods  have  
been  applied  to  viruses  since  the  1930s,  when  it  was  
discovered  that  simple  viruses  could  be  crystallized.  
The fi rst complete high - resolution structure of a crys-
talline virus, tomato bushy stunt virus, was obtained 
by  Harrison  and  his  co  -  workers  in  1978.  Computer  
analysis  of  the  diffraction  patterns  obtained  by  such  
studies has contributed to knowledge of the molecular 
structure of viruses. 
 The  crystallization  of  tobacco  mosaic  virus  (TMV)  
by Stanley in 1935 provided a boost to the analysis of 
the chemical composition of viruses. In 1937 Bawden 
and Pirie showed that TMV contained nucleic acid as 
well as proteins, and helped to promote the idea that 
viruses  consisted  of  nucleic  acid  contained  within  a  
protein coat. Having elucidated the structure of DNA 
and  observed  the  limited  coding  capacity  of  viral  
nucleic acid, Watson and Crick in 1956 suggested that 
viral nucleic acid was surrounded by a shell of identi-
cal protein subunits. In 1962 Lwoff and his colleagues 
proposed  a  universal  system  on  which  the  modern  
classifi cation of viruses is based. The method of clas-
sifi cation proposed was based on the following crite-
ria:  (1)  the  type  of  nucleic  acid;  (2)  the  symmetry  of  
the virus; (3) the presence or absence of an envelope; 
     Figure 1.2     Subdivisions of microbiology, a subject which has areas of common interest with pathology, immunology, pharmacology, 
medicine and therapeutics.  
Microbiology
Bacteriology, study of bacteria
Mycology, study of fungi
Virology, study of viruses
Study of unconventional infectious
agents, including prions

SECTION I
7
     Living cells, the smallest units capable of independent 
existence,  can  be  divided  into  two  sharply  differenti-
ated  groups,  eukaryotes  and  prokaryotes.  The  main  
differentiating features of eukaryotic and prokaryotic 
cells  are  presented  in  Table    2.1 .  Eukaryotes  possess  
true nuclei which contain chromosomes, and individ-
ual  cells  replicate  by  mitosis.  In  addition,  a  typical  
eukaryotic cell contains organelles such as mitochon-
dria, a Golgi apparatus, lysosomes and relatively large 
ribosomes.  Organisms  in  the  domains    Archaea    and 
 Bacteria ,   which   are   less   complex   than   eukaryotic   
organisms, are prokaryotes which lack true membrane -
  bound  nuclei.  Their  genetic  information  is  contained  
in a single circular chromosome. In some prokaryotic 
cells  such  as  bacteria,  extrachromosomal  DNA  in  the  
form of plasmids encodes for certain characteristics of 
the  organism.  Although  the  origin  of  life  is  a  much  
debated subject, it is probable that primitive microor-
ganisms  originated  from  ancestral  life  forms  several  
billion  years  ago.  The  degree  of  relatedness  among  
microorganisms  can  be  assessed  by  comparison  of  
their ribosomal ribonucleic acid (rRNA). There is some 
evidence  that  all  organisms  developed  from  a  group  
of  primitive  cells  rather  than  from  a  single  organism  
(Doolittle,    1999 ).  Prokaryotes  are  considered  as  one  
branch of the phylogenetic tree and eukaryotes as the 
second branch (Fig.  2.1 ). Lateral as well as horizontal 
transfer  of  genetic  material  probably  occurred  in  the  
course of evolutionary development, with some bacte-
rial  genes  incorporated  into  members  of  the    Archaea  
and  perhaps  with  some  prokaryotic  genes  incorpo-
rated  into  eukaryotes.  This  lateral  gene  transfer  may  
  Chapter 2 
Subdivisions,  c lassifi cation and 
 m orphological  c haracterization 
of  i nfectious  a gents         
explain  how  complex  eukaryotic  cells  acquired  some  
of  their  genes  and  organelles.  The  endosymbiosis  
hypothesis  proposes  that  at  some  stage  in  their  early  
development,    eukaryotic    cells    became    primitive    
phagocytes and acquired particular bacterial cell types 
which  enhanced  their  respiratory  activity  (de  Duve,  
  1996  ).  It  is  proposed  that  the  engulfed  bacteria  pro-
vided extra energy through this enhanced respiration 
to the host cell and eventually evolved into mitochon-
dria.  A  similar  phenomenon  may  account  for  the  
development  of  chloroplasts  in  plant  cells.  The  cyto-
plasmic membrane is the site of respiratory or photo-
synthetic  energy  generation  in  prokaryotes,  unlike  
eukaryotes in which these activities occur in the mem-
branes  of  mitochondria  and  chloroplasts.      
  Microscopical  t echniques 
  A  number  of  different  microscopical  methods  are  
employed   for   examining   microorganisms.   These   
include   bright - fi  eld,   dark - fi  eld,   phase - contrast   and 
electron  microscopy.  Table    2.2    summarizes  common  
techniques employed for the examination of microor-
ganisms  and  the  particular  types  of  microorganisms  
for  which  the  techniques  are  appropriate.  Units  of  
measurement  employed  in  microscopy  are  indicated  
in  Table   2.3 .   
  The  maximum  magnifi  cation  obtainable  by  bright  -
 fi  eld  microscopy,  using  oil  - immersion  objectives,  is  
approximately   1,000 × .   With   bright - fi eld  microscopy, 
suitably stained bacteria as small as 0.2     μ  m in size can 
Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease, Second Edition. P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning, 
P.J. Hartigan.
© 2011 P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning and P.J. Hartigan. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

8  Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease
SECTION I
     Figure 2.1     The evolutionary relationships of living organisms. Endosymbiosis is one of the postulated mechanisms whereby eukaryotic cells 
acquired mitochondria or chloroplasts by incorporation of prokaryotic cells.  
Endosymbiosis
(chloroplasts)
Endosymbiosis
(mitochondria)
P
r
o
k
a
r
y
o
t
a
E
u
k
a
r
y
o
t
a
Archaea
Bacteria
Fungi
Protozoa
Animalia
Primitive forms 
of life
Plantae
Chromista
  Table 2.1    Comparative features of prokaryotic and eukaryotic 
cells. 
   Feature     Prokaryotic cell     Eukaryotic cell  
  Size  of  individual 
cells  
  Usually  less  than 
5     μ m  in  greatest 
dimension  
  Typically  greater  than 
5     μ m  
  Genetic  material    Not  separated 
from cytoplasm  
  Nucleus  separated 
from cytoplasm by a 
nuclear membrane  
  Characteristics 
of chromosomes  
  Usually  single 
and circular  
  Multiple  and  linear  
  Mitochondria    Absent    Present  
  Golgi  apparatus    Absent    Present  
  Endoplasmic 
reticulum  
  Absent    Present  
  Location  of 
ribosomes  
  Dispersed 
throughout 
cytoplasm  
  Dispersed  throughout 
cytoplasm and also 
attached to 
endoplasmic reticulum  
  Cell  division    Binary  fi  ssion    Mitosis  
  
Table 2.2    Microscopical techniques used in microbiology. 
   Technique     Comments  
  Bright - fi  eld 
microscopy  
  Used for demonstrating the morphology 
and size of stained bacteria and fungi; 
staining affi nity may allow preliminary 
classifi cation of bacteria and the 
morphology of fungal structures permits 
identifi cation of the genus  
  Phase - contrast 
microscopy  
  Used for examining unstained cells in 
suspension  
  Dark - fi  eld 
microscopy  
  Used for examining unstained bacteria 
such as spirochaetes in suspension  
  Fluorescence 
microscopy  
  Used for identifying microorganisms 
with specifi c antibodies conjugated with 
fl uorochromes  
  Transmission 
electron 
microscopy  
  Used for demonstrating viruses in 
biological material and for identifying 
ultrastructural details of bacterial, 
fungal and mammalian cells  
  Scanning  electron 
microscopy  
  Used for demonstrating the three -
 dimensional structure of microorganisms  
be visualized. With dark - fi eld microscopy, the scatter-
ing of light by fi ne microorganisms such as spirocha-
etes  suspended  in  liquid  allows  them  to  be  observed  
against  a  dark  background.  In  common  with  dark  -
 fi  eld  techniques,  phase  - contrast  microscopy  can  be  
used to examine unstained specimens. This procedure 
is  more  appropriate  for  research  purposes  than  for  
routine diagnostic microbiology. 
 In transmission electron microscopy, beams of elec-
trons  are  used  in  place  of  visible  light  to  visualize  
small structures such as viruses. Specimens, placed on 
grids, are negatively stained with electron - dense com-
pounds   such   as   potassium   phosphotungstate   and   
viewed  as  magnifi  ed  images  on  a  fl uorescent screen. 
Magnifi  cations greater than 100,000 ×  are possible with 
modern instruments. Scanning electron microscopy is 
used  to  obtain  three  - dimensional  views  of  microor-
ganisms when coated with a thin fi lm of heavy metal. 
With this technique a wide range of magnifi cations up 
to 100,000 ×  is feasible.  

Subdivisions, classifi cation and morphological characterization of infectious agents   9
SECTION I
  Pathogenic  m icroorganisms 
  Most  microorganisms  found  in  nature  are  not  harm-
ful  to  humans,  animals  or  plants.  Indeed,  many  bac-
teria  and  fungi  make  an  important  contribution  to  
biological activities which take place in soil, in water 
and  in  the  alimentary  tract  of  animals  and  humans.  
Those   microorganisms   that   can   cause   disease   in   
animals  or  humans  are  referred  to  as  pathogenic  
microorganisms. 
  Bacteria 
 Microorganisms belonging to the domain  Archaea   (for-
merly  Archaebacteria ) are not associated with diseases 
of  domestic  animals.  Organisms  (bacteria)  belonging  
to  the  domain    Bacteria   (formerly    Eubacteria )   include 
many pathogens of veterinary importance. 
  Bacteria  are  unicellular  and  are  smaller  and  less  
complex than eukaryotic cells such as mammalian red 
blood  cells  (Table    2.4  ).  They  usually  have  rigid  cell  
walls  containing  a  peptidoglycan  layer,  multiply  by  
binary fi ssion and exhibit considerable morphological 
diversity.  They  occur  as  rods,  cocci  and  helical  forms  
and occasionally as branching fi laments. Despite their 
morphological  diversity,  most  bacteria  are  between  
0.5      μ  m   and   5      μ   m  in  length.  Motile  bacteria  possess  
fl  agella by which they can move through liquid media. 
The  majority  of  bacteria  can  grow  on  suitable  inert  
media; some require special growth supplements and 
  Table 2.3    Units of measurement used in microbiology. 
   Unit     Abbreviation     Comments  
  Millimetre    mm    One  thousandth  of  a  metre 
(10 
 − 3
     m).  Bacterial  and  fungal 
colony sizes are usually 
measured in mm. When growing 
on a suitable medium, bacterial 
colonies range in size from 
0.5    mm  to  5    mm  
  Micrometre 
(micron)  
   
 μ  m  
  One thousandth of a millimetre 
(10 
 – 6
    m). Used for measuring the 
size of bacterial and fungal 
cells. Most bacteria range in 
size from 0.5    
 μ  m  to  5      μ  m.  A 
small number of bacteria may 
exceed  20     
 μ  m in length  
  Nanometre    nm    One  thousandth  of  a  micrometre 
(10 
 − 9
     m).  Used  for  expressing 
the size of viruses. Most viruses 
of veterinary importance range 
in size from 20   nm to 300   nm  
  
Table 2.4    A comparison of the morphology and size of bacterial 
cells relative to a mammalian red blood cell.
 
   Cell     Morphology / size     Comments  
  Red  blood 
cell  
  
7 μm
    
  Readily  seen  using 
conventional light 
microscopy  
  Bacillus  
  
5 μm
    
  Rod - shaped  cells,  usually 
stained by the Gram 
method. Using bright -
 fi eld microscopy, a 
magnifi cation of 1,000 ×  
is required to observe 
most bacterial cells  
  Coccus  
  
1 μm
    
  Spherical  cells,  often 
occurring in chains or in 
grape - like  clusters  
  Spirochaete  
  
10 μm
    
  Thin,  helical  bacteria. 
Dark - fi  eld  microscopy 
(without staining) or 
special staining methods 
are required to 
demonstrate these 
unusual microorganisms  
particular  atmospheric  conditions  for  growth.  Two  
groups  of  small  bacteria,  rickettsiae  and  chlamydiae,  
which  are  unable  to  multiply  on  inert  media,  require  
living  cells  for    in  vitro   growth.  Cyanobacteria,  for-
merly  referred  to  as  blue  - green  algae,  utilize  chloro-
phyll  for  some  metabolic  pathways.  Unlike  algae,  
which  store  chlorophyll  in  organelles  referred  to  as  
chloroplasts,  cyanobacteria  have  chlorophyll  distrib-
uted inside their cell membranes.    
  Fungi 
 Yeasts,  moulds  and  mushrooms  belong  to  a  large  
group of non - photosynthetic eukaryotes termed fungi. 
Fungi   may   be   either   unicellular   or   multicellular.   
Multicellular  fungi  produce  fi lamentous microscopic 
structures called moulds; yeasts, which are unicellular, 
have  a  spherical  or  ovoid  shape  and  multiply  by  
budding.  In  moulds,  the  cells  are  cylindrical  and  
attached end to end, forming branched hyphae (Table 
 2.5 ). A notable feature of fungi is their ability to secrete 
potent enzymes that can digest organic matter. When 
moisture  is  present  and  other  environmental  condi-
tions are favourable, fungi can degrade a wide variety 
of  organic  substrates.  A  small  number  of  yeasts  and  
moulds are pathogenic for humans and animals. Some 
fungi  invade  tissues  whereas  others  produce  toxic  

10  Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease
SECTION I
serious disease by invading and destroying host cells. 
A  small  number  of  viruses  are  aetiologically  impli-
cated  in  the  development  of  malignant  tumours  in  
humans  and  animals.    
  Prions 
 Infectious particles that are smaller than viruses have 
been   implicated   in   the   neurological   diseases   of   
animals  and  humans  that  are  termed  transmissible  
spongiform  encephalopathies.  These  particles,  called  
prions,  are  distinct  from  viruses  and  appear  to  be  
devoid  of  nucleic  acid.  Prions  seem  to  be  composed  
of  an  abnormally  - folded  protein  capable  of  inducing  
conformational    changes    in    homologous    normal    
host  cell  protein.  Following  the  induced  changes,  
structurally - altered  abnormal  protein  accumulates  in  
and damages long - lived cells such as neurons. Genetic 
factors seem to infl uence the susceptibility of humans 
and animals to prion diseases. Prions exhibit remark-
able  resistance  to  physical  and  chemical  inactivation  
procedures.   
  Biological  c lassifi cation and  n omenclature 
 Microscopic living organisms were formerly classifi ed 
on the basis of phenotypic expression including mor-
substances  called  mycotoxins  which,  if  present  on  
crops or in stored food such as grain or nuts, can cause 
disease in animals and humans.    
  Algae 
 A morphologically and physiologically diverse group 
of  organisms,  algae  are  usually  considered  plant  - like 
because they contain chlorophyll. Many algae are free -
  living  in  water;  others  grow  on  the  surfaces  of  rocks  
and  on  other  structures  in  the  environment.  Some  
algae produce pigments which impart distinct colora-
tion to water surfaces containing algal blooms. When 
water  temperatures  are  high,  algal  growth  may  be  
marked,  leading  to  the  production  of  toxins  that  can  
accumulate  in  shellfi  sh  or  in  water  containing  algal  
blooms.  
  Viruses 
 Unlike bacteria and fungi, viruses are not cells. A virus 
particle or virion consists of nucleic acid, either DNA 
or RNA, enclosed in a protein coat called a capsid. In 
addition, some viruses are surrounded by envelopes. 
Viruses are much smaller than bacteria, and typically 
range in size from 20   nm to 300   nm in diameter (Table 
  2.6  ).  Despite  their  simple  structure,  viruses  occur  in  
many  shapes.  Some  are  spherical,  others  are  brick  -
 shaped or bullet - shaped and a few have an elongated 
appearance.  Because  they  lack  the  structures  and  
enzymes  necessary  for  metabolism  and  independent  
reproduction, viruses can multiply only within living 
cells. Both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells are suscep-
tible to infection by viruses. Those viruses that invade 
bacterial  cells  are  called  bacteriophages.  Pathogenic  
viruses  which  infect  humans  and  animals  can  cause  
  Table 2.5    A comparison of the morphology and size of a bacterial 
cell and two fungal forms. 
   Structure     Morphology / size     Comments  
   Bacterial cell           
     Coccus  
  
1 μm
    
  Often occur in chains 
or  grape - like  clusters  
   Fungal forms           
         Yeast  
  
5 μm
    
  
Reproduce by 
budding  
     Mould  
  
30 μm
    
 
 Branched  structures 
(hyphae) composed 
of many cells  
  
Table 2.6    A comparison of a bacterial cell and a large and a small 
virus.  
a
   
   Structure     Morphology / size     Comments  
   Bacterial cell           
   
  Coccus  
  
1 μm
    
  
Readily seen at 
magnifi cation of 1,000 ×
   
   Viruses           
     Poxvirus  
  
300 nm
    
  
Viruses cannot be seen 
using conventional 
bright - fi  eld  microscopy
  
     Parvovirus  
  
20 nm
    
  Electron  microscopy  at 
a magnifi cation of up 
to 100,000 ×  is used to 
demonstrate viruses in 
clinical specimens or in 
laboratory preparations  
    a  ,  not  drawn  to  scale.   

Subdivisions, classifi cation and morphological characterization of infectious agents   11
SECTION I
 In terms of sexually reproducing higher organisms, 
a  species  is  defi  ned  as  a  group  or  population  com-
posed of similar individuals that are capable of inter-
breeding  naturally  and  are  reproductively  isolated  
from  other  groups.  However,  the  defi  nition  of  what  
constitutes  a  species  poses  particular  problems  in  
microbiology. Members of the  Bacteria  and  Archaea   do 
not  undergo  true  reproduction.  As  a  result,  bacteria  
tend to be defi ned operationally or in subjective terms 
as a collection of strains that share many similar prop-
erties  but  differ  signifi  cantly  from  other  strains.  It  is  
possible to be more precise by using a defi nition based 
on genetic data with a species expected to share 70% 
or  greater  binding  in  standardized  DNA  – DNA  hy-
bridization  studies  and/or  over  97%  gene  - sequence 
identity  for  16S  ribosomal  RNA  (rRNA).  Recently  a  
threshold range of 98.7 to 99% sequence similarity has 
been recommended as the point at which DNA – DNA 
reassociation   experiments   should   be   required   for   
testing  the  genomic  uniqueness  of  a  novel  isolate  
(Stackebrandt  and  Ebers,    2006 ).  Further  debate  and  
refi   nement   regarding   the   defi   nition   of   a   bacterial   
species is on - going. 
  Microorganisms  are  generally  named  according  to  
the binomial system devised by the Swedish botanist 
Carolus Linnaeus in the eighteenth century. The names 
are  Latin  or  Latinized  Greek  derivations  and  are  
printed  in  italics.  There  are  two  parts,  a  capitalized  
generic name and a specifi c epithet. For example, the 
bacterium that causes anthrax in humans and animals 
is  termed    Bacillus  anthracis,  Bacillus   being  the  generic  
name  and    anthracis    the  specifi  c  name.  The  naming  of  
species  and  higher  groups  of  bacteria  is  regulated  
by  the  Bacteriological  Code    –   The  International  Code  
of  Nomenclature  of  Bacteria .   The  International  Journal  of  
Systematic  and  Evolutionary  Microbiology    is  the  offi -
cial  publication  for  recording  taxonomical  changes  
of  Bacteria  and  Archaea . Websites providing listings of 
approved  names  include  List  of  Prokaryotic  Names  
with Standing in Nomenclature ( http://www.bacterio.
cict.fr )  and  Bacterial  Nomenclature  Up - to - Date  ( http://
www.dsmz.de/bactnom/bactname.htm ). 
 Viruses pose particular taxonomic problems in that 
they are regarded as subcellular, non - living, infectious 
entities and are often ignored or considered alongside 
their host species by scientists dealing with the global 
taxonomy   of   organisms.   However,   virologists   are   
agreed that viruses should be considered as a separate 
group  of  organisms  regardless  of  their  host  species,  
and have established a free - standing virus taxonomy 
derived  from  classical  Linnean  systematics  but  with  
rules unique to the discipline of virology. The system 
is   operated   by   the   International   Committee   on   
Taxonomy  of  Viruses  (ICTV)  with  the  latest  informa-
tion   on   viral   taxonomy   published   periodically   in   
phology   and   distinct   attributes   refl ecting   unique 
metabolic properties. Increasingly, classifi cation meth-
ods  for  microorganisms  have  come  to  rely  heavily  
on  genotypic  analysis.  In  recent  years  this  has  led  to  
changes  in  the  classifi  cation  and  nomenclature  of  
microorganisms. 
 The practice and science of orderly classifi cation of 
organisms into hierarchical units termed taxa (singu-
lar taxon) is known as taxonomy. There are three inter-
related parts to taxonomy: identifi cation, nomenclature 
and classifi cation. Taxonomy is important in microbi-
ology because (1) it permits accurate identifi cation of 
organisms;  (2)  it  provides  precise  names  that  permit  
effi  cient  communication;  (3)  it  groups  similar  organ-
isms in a way that allows predictions to be made and 
hypotheses  to  be  framed  with  reasonable  confi dence 
regarding  members  of  the  same  group.  Most  organ-
isms  are  grouped  according  to  their  genotypic  and  
phenotypic characteristics. Traditionally, great empha-
sis  was  placed  on  anatomical  or  morphological  simi-
larities  but  this  has  increasingly  been  replaced  by  a  
polyphasic  approach  facilitated  by  the  availability  of  
highly sophisticated methods of identifi cation and the 
inclusion  of  additional  criteria  for  the  description  of  
new  species.  Examples  of  phenotypic  characteristics  
used  in  taxonomy  include  morphology,  metabolism,  
physiology, cell chemistry (particularly fatty acid com-
position  in  the  case  of  bacteria)  and  motility.  DNA  
profi     ling,     DNA     –     DNA     hybridization,     multilocus     
sequence  typing  (MLST)  and  percentage  of  guanine  
plus  cytosine  in  an  organism  ’ s  DNA  (GC  ratio)  are  
examples of the genetic methods used. Complementing 
these  two  types  of  analyses  is  phylogenetic  analysis,  
which attempts to create a framework of evolutionary 
relationships. The exponential growth in the availabil-
ity  of  genetic  sequencing  data  has  permitted  taxon-
omy to increasingly refl ect phylogenetic relationships 
among microorganisms. 
  The  basic  taxonomic  unit  or  group  is  the  species.  
Similar species are grouped into genera, which in turn 
are placed in families. Several levels or ranks are used 
in this classifi cation, with higher ranks including indi-
vidual groups based on the shared properties of these 
groups.  The  levels  in  ascending  order  are  species,  
genus,   family,   order,   class,   phylum   and   kingdom   
or  domain  (Fig.    2.2  ).  Traditionally,  biologists  have  
grouped   organisms   into   fi   ve   kingdoms:   animals,   
plants, fungi, protists and bacteria. However, analysis 
of  small  subunit  ribosomal  RNA  gene  sequences  has  
suggested  that  cellular  life  has  evolved  along  three  
primary lineages. The three resulting groups are called 
domains  and  are  usually  placed  above  the  kingdom  
level.  Two  of  the  domains,    Bacteria    and    Archaea ,   are 
exclusively microbial and prokaryotic, while the third 
domain,  Eukarya,  contains the eukaryotes.   

12
  
Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease
SECTION I
     Figure 2.2     Example of hierarchical levels of taxonomy using the bacterium  
Escherichia coli . Note that many of the levels are deliberately incomplete to 
simplify the diagram.  
Bacteria
Proteobacteria
g-Proteobacteria
δ-Proteobacteria
α-Proteobacteria
ε-Proteobacteria
β-Proteobacteria
Enterobacteriales
VibrionalesPasteurellales
PseudomonadalesLegionellales
Thiotrichales
Chromatiales
Domain
Phylum
Class
Order
Family
Genus
Species
Enterobacteriaceae
Escherichia
Enterobacter
Klebsiella
Salmonella
ShigellaProteus
Yersinia
Serratia
E. coli
E. fergussonii
E. hermanniiE. vulnerisE. albertii
ActinobacteriaFirmicutes
Spirochaetes
Chlamydiae

Subdivisions, classifi cation and morphological characterization of infectious agents   13
SECTION I
known  as  the  order  of  presentation,  are  used  based  
on the composition and structure of the viral genome, 
including  genome  polarity  and  reverse  transcription:  
double  -  stranded  DNA  viruses,  single  -  stranded  DNA  
viruses,  DNA  and  RNA  reverse  transcribing  viruses,  
double - stranded    RNA    viruses,    negative    - stranded 
single  -  stranded  RNA  viruses  and  positive  -  stranded  
single - stranded  RNA  viruses.  In  addition  there  is  a  
category  of  unassigned  viruses  and  one  for  subviral  
agents  including  viroids,  satellites  and  prions.    
  References 
    de     Duve  ,     C.     ( 1996 ).    The   birth   of   complex   cells .    Scientifi c 
American ,   274 ,   38  –  45 .  
    Doolittle ,    W.F.     ( 1999 ).    Phylogenetic   classifi  cation  and  the  
universal tree .  Science ,   284 ,   2124  –  2128 .  
    Fauquet ,    C.M.  ,     Mayo ,    M.A.  ,     Maniloff ,    J.  ,     Desselberger ,    U.   
and    Ball ,   L.A.    ( 2005 ).   Eighth  Report  of  the  ICTV .   Elsevier , 
 Amsterdam .  
    Stackebrandt ,   E.    and    Ebers ,   J.    ( 2006 ).   Taxonomic  parameters 
revisited: tarnished gold standards .  Microbiology Today ,   33 , 
 152  –  155 .  
  Further  r eading 
    Madigan ,   M.T.  ,    Martinko ,   J.M.  ,    Dunlap ,   P.V.    and    Clark ,   D.P.   
( 2009 ).    Brock  Biology  of  Microorganisms .    Twelfth   Edition . 
 Pearson  Benjamin  Cummings ,   San  Francisco .  
    Prescott ,   L.M.  ,    Harley ,   J.P.    and    Klein ,   D.A.    ( 2005 ).   Microbiology . 
 Sixth  Edition .   McGraw  Hill ,   Boston .  
    Schlegel ,   H.G.    ( 1993 ).   General Microbiology .   Seventh  Edition . 
 Cambridge  University  Press ,   Cambridge .    
 
  
report  form  (Fauquet    et  al .,    2005 )  or  available  elec-
tronically   at      http://ictvonline.org/virusTaxonomy.
asp . A number of points must be borne in mind when 
considering  the  taxonomy  of  viruses:  (1)  it  is  consid-
ered unlikely that viruses evolved from a single origi-
nal  protovirus  and,  as  a  result,  the  highest  level  
recognized is that of order; (2) some viruses frequently 
undergo   genetic   recombination   and   reassortment   
resulting  in  chimeric  organisms  with  polyphyletic  
genomes;  (3)  some  viruses  infect  both  vertebrate  and  
invertebrate  hosts,  evolving  differently  in  the  differ-
ent  host  species;  (4)  some  viruses  integrate  into  the  
genome of their host but can switch between horizon-
tal and vertical transmission by moving in and out of 
the  host  cell  genome,  which  may  result  in  the  incor-
poration  of  host  genes  into  the  viral  genome.  As  a  
result,  it  is  inevitable  that  the  classifi cation  system 
will at times appear artifi cial and give rise to misfi ts. 
A  non  - systematic,  polythetic,  hierarchical  system  of  
classifi  cation  is  used  for  viruses.  In  essence  a  virus  
species is defi ned by a consensus group of properties 
without  any  one  of  these  properties  being  essential.  
Viruses  are  generally  grouped  in  families  based  on  
virion  morphology  and  nucleic  acid  type.  Further  
subdivision  of  pathogenic  animal  viruses  frequently  
relates to the species of host affected and to the clini-
cal  disease  which  is  produced.  Each  viral  genus  con-
tains  a  type  species,  which  is  defi  ned  as  the  virus  
species  responsible  for  the  original  creation  of  the  
genus  and  whose  name  is  linked  to  the  use  of  the  
genus   name.   Virus   species   names   are   commonly   
abbreviated, for example BPIV - 3 for bovine parainfl u-
enza virus 3. In presenting taxonomic descriptions of 
viruses,    several    informal    categories,    collectively    

SECTION I
14
     Infectious  disease  is  a  major  cause  of  morbidity  and  
mortality in avian and mammalian species. Individual 
body systems supply the host ’ s respiratory, nutritional 
and sensory needs, and the immune system is uniquely 
equipped to provide defence against microbial or par-
asitic  infection  irrespective  of  the  source  or  the  route  
of  transmission.  Some  microorganisms  cause  oppor-
tunistic  infections  in  domestic  animals;  other  infec-
tious  agents,  termed  pathogenic  microorganisms,  are  
capable of causing serious infection if they gain entry 
into the body. The immune system is composed of an 
array  of  structures,  cells  and  secretions  which  offer  
defence  not  only  against  opportunistic  infections  but  
also  against  pathogenic  microorganisms  which  can  
cause life - threatening infections in susceptible animals. 
 The  fi  rst barriers to infection that offer rapid, protec-
tive  responses  are  components  of  innate  immunity.  
These components include anatomical structures such 
as the skin and mucous membranes, inhibitory secre-
tions,  antimicrobial  factors  and  phagocytic  cells  (Fig.  
 3.1 ). If an infectious agent enters the tissues, material 
from this invading pathogen can be presented to lym-
phocytes  by  phagocytic  cells  such  as  macrophages.  
These lymphocytes then undergo functional changes, 
proliferate and secrete soluble factors which promote 
the  involvement  of  other  cells  of  the  immune  system  
in  an  attempt  to  contain  the  infection.  This  response  
on the part of lymphocytes is referred to as an adap-
tive    immune    response.    Moreover,    following    an    
encounter   with   a   microbial   pathogen,   the   body   ’   s   
immune   system   learns   from   the   experience   by   
responding in a specifi c manner to the pathogen and 
by     ‘ remembering ’     the    interaction.    Immunological 
memory  resides  in  some  lymphocytes  that  are  pro-
  Chapter 3 
Infection and  i mmunity        
duced  in  the  course  of  a  response  to  an  infectious  
agent, and these memory cells react quickly to subse-
quent   invasion   by   the   same   agent.   The   immune   
system,  therefore,  has  components  that  function  as  
innate,  non - specifi  c  barriers  to  infectious  agents,  and  
components  that  exhibit  specifi  city  combined  with  
immunological memory. It provides protection against 
a  vast  array  of  actual  or  potential  pathogens  present  
in  the  immediate  environment  of  animals.  Immune  
responses,  however,  are  not  confi  ned  to  infectious  
agents and responses to innocuous substances such as 
pollens, foreign proteins and some therapeutic drugs, 
can   cause   potentially   destructive   hypersensitivity   
reactions. Although the primary activity of the immune 
system  is  usually  considered  to  be  associated  with  
protection  against  infectious  agents,  it  has  a  defi ned 
role  in  immune  surveillance  for  the  detection  of  neo-
plastic tissue changes and, in some instances, elimina-
tion  of  such  undesirable  mutated  cells  or  neoplastic  
cells by immune mechanisms.   
 Soon  after  birth  the  external  surfaces  of  the  body,  
extensive portions of the alimentary tract and regions 
of the respiratory and urinary tracts become colonized 
by bacteria. The host and colonizing bacteria live in a 
relatively peaceful state of coexistence, with microor-
ganisms restricted to parts of the body where they can 
be  tolerated  and  microbial  invasion  of  tissues  can  be  
prevented  by  natural  antibacterial  defence  mecha-
nisms.   Bacteria   that   colonize   tissues   of   the   body   
without   producing   disease   constitute   part   of   the   
normal  fl  ora.  This  harmonious  relationship  between  
animals   and   their   environment   can   be   reinforced   
by   good   management   systems,   optimal   nutrition,   
adequate  fl  oor  space  and  effective  disease  control  
Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease, Second Edition. P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning, 
P.J. Hartigan.
© 2011 P.J. Quinn, B.K. Markey, F.C. Leonard, E.S. FitzPatrick, S. Fanning and P.J. Hartigan. Published 2011 by Blackwell Publishing Ltd.

Infection and immunity
  
15
SECTION I
     Figure 3.1     Cells, secretions and other elements of innate and adaptive immunity which contribute to protection against infectious agents. IL: Interleukin; IFN -  γ : 
interferon -  γ ; 
TNF: tumour necrosis factor.  
Hypothalamus - fever
Endothelial cells - inflammation
Liver - acute phase proteins
T lymphocytes
Cells
Act as antigen-
presenting cells
Cytokines with
diverse activities
in the mediation
of inflammatory
and immune
responses
Components
related to
innate immunity
Immune
system
Components of
specific
adaptive immunity
Specific
antibodies
IL-8, TNF-β
IL-2
IL-5
IL-6
TNF
IL-4
IL-1
Neutrophils
Monocytes
Macrophages
Dendritic cells
NK cells
Eosinophils
Mast cells
IL-12, IL-15, IL-18
B lymphocytes
Immune complexes, formed by
antibodies combining with
antigens, activate complement
When activated by immune
complexes, complement amplifies
protective role of antibodies
Inhibitory
secretions
Gastric acid
Fatty acids
  in skin
Bile
Mucus
Antimicrobial factors
Complement
Lysozyme
Interferons
Acute phase proteins
Mannose-binding lectin
Properdin
Lactoperoxidase
Lactoferrin
Transferrin
Peptides, such as defensins
Degradative enzymes
Toxic free radicals
Cytokines
Chemotactic factors
Anatomical structures
and mechanical activity
Skin
Mucous membranes
Nasal conchae
Mucociliary clearance
Flushing activity of urine
  and lacrimal secretions
Peristalsis
Coughing and sneezing
Plasma
cells
 IFN-
γ
IL-13, IFN-
γ
IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-8, IL-13, TNF-β, IFN-
γ
IL-2, IL-4, IL-5, IL-6, IL-8, IL-13, IFN-
γ
Cytokine
production
I
L
-
1
5
,
I
L
-
1
8

16  Veterinary Microbiology and Microbial Disease
SECTION I
other  microorganisms  from  the  animal  ’  s  immediate  
environment may colonize particular sites on the skin 
and regions of the alimentary, respiratory or urogeni-
tal  tracts.  Microorganisms  that  compete  successfully  
for  particular  sites  gradually  form  a  stable  normal  
fl  ora. Different regions of the body may have a distinc-
tive  resident  fl  ora  suggesting  that  regional  coloniza-
tion  may  refl  ect  a  selective  advantage  on  the  part  of  
successful   microorganisms.   The   ability   to   survive   
acidic  conditions  in  the  alimentary  tract  or  tolerance  
for  some  naturally  occurring  antimicrobial  factors  
confers  particular  survival  capabilities  on  some  resi-
dent  fl  ora.  Adherence  to  host  cells  or  synthesis  of  
metabolic substances antagonistic to competitors may 
enhance colonization of the skin, mucous membranes 
or  parts  of  the  alimentary  tract  by  some  bacteria  and  
yeasts.  There  is  evidence  that  the  normal  fl ora  can 
compete  with  and  sometimes  prevent  establishment  
of pathogenic microorganisms. This may be achieved 
by  competition  for  nutrients,  by  formation  of  inhibi-
tory substances, or by attachment to receptors on cell 
surfaces, thereby preventing colonization by invading 
pathogens.  Although  the  normal  fl  ora  is  not  directly  
associated  with  non - specifi c immunity, their competi-
tive  role  can  be  considered  benefi  cial  for  the  host.  In  
programmes  (Fig.    3.2 ).  Negative  factors  that  can  tilt  
the balance in favour of potential or actual pathogens 
include   overcrowding,   uncontrolled   environmental   
temperature, nutritional imbalances and absence of a 
well  designed  and  implemented  disease  control  pro-
gramme. Even if bacteria, fungi or viruses succeed in 
entering  the  tissues  and  causing  infection,  disease  is  
not an inevitable outcome. Characteristics of the infec-
tious agent, environmental infl uences and the suscep-
tibility  of  the  infected  animal  usually  determine  the  
outcome of infection. If infection is not quickly elimi-
nated,  clinical  disease  or  subclinical  infection  is  the  
likely  result  (Fig.    3.3  ).  Characteristics  of  individual  
species  of  pathogenic  bacteria  can  strongly  infl uence 
their  ability  to  overcome  host  defences  and  produce  
disease.  Structural,  metabolic  and  other  features  of  
bacteria  that  promote  disease  development  are  pre-
sented  in  Table   3.1 .      
  Normal  fl  ora 
 Soon after birth, neonatal animals are exposed through 
contact,  ingestion  or  inhalation  to  microorganisms  
present  on  the  dam.  Bacteria,  yeasts  and  eventually  
     Figure 3.2     The infl uence of disease control programmes, environmental conditions and other factors on the health status of animal 
populations. The balance between positive factors that promote health, and negative factors that predispose to disease can determine the 
health and welfare status of animal populations.  
Positive
Negative
Health
Disease
Disease
Health
Ineffective disease control measures
Inadequate vaccination programme
Inappropriate chemotherapy
Misuse of chemoprophylaxis
Random selection of replacement animals
Nutritional imbalances
Contaminated food or water
Ineffective insect vector control measures
Water deprivation
Overcrowding
Uncontrolled environmental temperature
Inadequate ventilation
Effective disease control programme
Planned vaccination programme
Appropriate chemotherapy
Strategic chemoprophylaxis
Careful selection of replacement animals
Optimal nutrition
Pathogen-free food and water
Effective insect vector control measures
Constant supply of clean water
Adequate floor space
Regulated environmental temperature
Controlled ventilation