

9/6/2024
LUANAR_Introduction to Agricultural Economics1
INTRODUCTION TO AGRICULTURAL ECONOMICS
(NAAE 32101)
Presented By:
Department of Agriculture & Food systems
Faculty of Natural Resources & Life Sciences
LUANAR-Natural Resources College
Intro. to Agricultural Economics1
COURSE DETAILS
LECTURE HOURS/Week2
PRACTICAL HOURS/Week1
CREDIT HOURS2.5
METHOD OF ASSESSMENT
Continuous Assessment 
(Assignments, Tests, Mid-Semester 
Exam)
40%
End of Semester Examination 60%
Intro. to Agricultural Economics2
COURSE AIM & OUTCOMES
AIM
To introduce students to the basic principles and theories of microeconomics
used in the agricultural sector (production of crops, livestock and other
agricultural areas)
OUTCOMES:
Upon successful completion of this course, the students should be able to:
Explain the basic concepts and analytical techniques of microeconomic theory
Apply the analytical techniques of microeconomic theory in solving problems
of the agricultural sector
Intro. to Agricultural Economics3
LECTURE TOPICS
Nature and Scope of Agricultural Economics
(What is Economics? What is
Agricultural Economics? Scarcity and the Science of Economics; Basic Economic
Problem: Society’s unlimited economic wants; Factors of Production: Land, Capital,
Labour, and Entrepreneurial ability; Questions that agricultural economists attempt to
answer: Economic perspective: Rational Behaviour; Marginal benefits and marginal costs;
Trade-Offs and Opportunity Costs; Economic Methodology-Steps followed in economic
methodology; Policy Economics- Basic steps in policy formulation; Economic Growth and
Economic Development: Agricultural Sector Growth and Development; Economic
Systems; The Circular Flow Model)
Demand for Agricultural Products
(Individual and Market demand; Derivation of
demand curve; Determinants of Demand and the Demand Function; Elasticity of demand;
Determinants of Price Elasticity of Demand)
Supply of Agricultural Products
(Individual and Market Supply; Determinants of
Supply; Characteristics of Agricultural Supply; Agricultural Supply and the objective of the
Farm: The supply function; Elasticity & Determinants of Elasticity of Supply)
Intro. to Agricultural Economics4
LECTURE TOPICS
Theory of Consumer Behaviour and Utility maximization
(The Situation of a 
Typical Consumer; The Concept of Utility; Approaches to the Study of Consumer 
Behaviour and Utility Maximisation; The Budget Line and Indifference Curve)
Agricultural Resource Use
(
The demand for an input: Marginal Productivity theory of
input demand and Competitive factor markets; Demand curve of the firm for one variable
input, Demand curve of the firm for several variable inputs and Market demand curve for
an input; The market supply of inputs; The Theory of Equilibrium in Factor Markets:
Equilibrium in a competitive factor market, Factor market with monopoly power and
Factor market with monopsony power; The economics of Size in Farming)
Market Mechanisms for Agricultural Products
(
Functions & Efficiency of Markets;
Price Determination in Agricultural Markets-Market Prices, Economic Functions of Prices,
Major Factors Influencing Farm Prices; Market Equilibrium-Surpluses and Deficits
(shortages), Equilibrium Price and Quantity; Government Intervention on Commodity
Pricing: Price Ceilings & Shortages, Price Floors & Surpluses; Fluctuations in Agricultural
Prices: Factors that Cause Fluctuations in Agricultural Commodity Prices; Cobweb
Theorem).
Intro. to Agricultural Economics5
READINGS:
PRESCRIBED READINGS(Available in the Library)
McConnell, R.C., Brue, S.L. & Flynn, S.Economics.23
rd
Edition,
New York, USA, McGrall-Hill Companies Inc.
Gans, J., King, S. & Stonecash, R.Principles of Economics (2012).
5
th
Edition.
Collander, D.C.Economics. 5
th
Edition.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics6

9/6/2024
LUANAR_Introduction to Agricultural Economics2
READINGS...
RECOMMENDED READINGS (Available in the Library):
Cramer, G.L., Clarence W.J and Southgate, D.D. Agricultural Economics
and Agribusiness, 8
th
Ed.
Rickets, C. & Ricketts, K. Agribusiness: Fundamentals & Applications.
2
nd
Edition.
Hill, B. An introduction to Economics for Students of Agriculture. 2
nd
Edition.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics7
Economics is...
Defined differently by different people....
...study of allocation of scarce & limited resources among competing
alternatives.
...study of how scarce & limited resources (land, labor, capital, and
management) are allocated among different and competing choices to
best satisfy human wants.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics8
Resources/Capitals
Resources are the inputs that individuals/families or nations use to produce
outputs/products (goods & services).
Resources are classifiedinto:
Natural resources (land & mineral deposits),
Human resources (labour services provided by labourers & managers
for production of goods & services & Entrepreneurial /Management
skills),
Financial resources
Physical resources
Social resources
Resources are considered scarce because of tendencies for society or
individuals to demandmore resources than what are available.
Resources or goods that are not scarce are calledfree resources or free goods (e.g.
Sunlight/ air).
Scarcity of resources is the foundation of the study of economics.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics9
Scarcity:
Scarcityrefers to the fixed quantity of resources that are available
to meet societal needs.
Scarcity-A situation where there are not enough resources
available to satisfy people’s needs or wants.
Scarcity of resources limits options & demands making ofchoices-
because people/individuals can not have everything at a time, they
must make choices as to what they will have and what they will not
have (sacrifice).
Scarcity is a relative concept-All nations/individuals face the
problem of scarcity. The difference lies in the degree to which
resource scarcity exists and the forms that it takes.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics10
Needs & Wants
Needs: things that are crucial to sustain a living.
E.g. food, clothing and shelter.
Wantsare things we can live without/ are not crucial to daily living.
E.g. A basic tractor is a need to a farmer, but a tractor with air conditioner
and radio may be a want.
Context matters when differentiating needs and wants.
Society and Human wants are insatiable(unlimited, unsatisfied):-Human
wants cannot be satisfied no matter how much or how many goods we have.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics11
Choices
Scarcity of resources forces consumers & producers to make choices.
Choices have a time dimension-choices consumers/businesses make today have
an effect on how they will live in the future.
Choices one makes also have an associatedcost,calledOpportunity Cost.
Opportunity costrefers to the foregone benefits linked with the next best
alternative/choice in a set of choices available to decisionmakers.
Example:
The opportunity cost of going to college now is the income you are currently
foregoing/sacrificing by not getting a job now.
The opportunity cost of a consumer withdrawing MK10,000 out of his or her
savings account to buy a bag is the interest income this money would have
earned if left in the savings account.
The bottom line is that economic benefits must exceed the costs, including
foregone income (opportunity cost).
Intro. to Agricultural Economics12

9/6/2024
LUANAR_Introduction to Agricultural Economics3
Microeconomics & Macroeconomics
Microeconomics is a branch of economics that focuses on the
actions or behavior of individual agents or groups of agents.
The prefixmicromeans “small,” indicating that microeconomics
studies the economy on a small scale.
Microeconomics is concerned with behaviour & decisions of
individual economic units/entities/markets that make up the economy.
E.g. behaviour & decisions ofindividual farmers (producers/suppliers),
households (consumers), government entities, agricultural buyers, and
entrepreneurs.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics13
Macroeconomics & Microeconomics...
Macroeconomics:
The prefixmacromeans “large,” indicating that macroeconomics is
the study of the economy on a large scale or nationally.
Macroeconomics looks at the aggregate (total) performances of all
the markets in the national economy and is concerned with the
choices made by large sub-sectors of the economy.
Macroeconomics focuses on broad aggregates, e.g.:
Growth of the nation’s gross domestic product (GDP),
Trade-offs between unemployment and inflation.
Trade balance (exports minus imports).
Exchange rate (currency devaluation, depreciation/appreciation)
Intro. to Agricultural Economics14
Positive Versus Normative Economics
Positive Economics:
Focuses on facts & cause-and-effect relationships
Explains economic behaviour using scientific explanations. Concerned with “What 
is?”
Is a basis for development of public policy.
E.g.: the rate of inflation in the past one year has been increasing as compared to 
the financial year 2022/23 
Normative Economics:
Involves value judgements about what the economy should be-focuses on what 
economic policies and goals should be implemented.
Expresses subjective feelings  of how things should be like
E.g.: The Government of Malawi should put in place measures to reduce cost of gas 
to curb depletion of trees.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics15
Agriculture Economics
Is an applied field of economics, which applies principles of choice in the use
of scarce resources such as land, labour, capital and management in farming
and allied activities.
Helps farmers, consumers and development practitioners to efficiently utilise
resources (e.g. land, labour and finances).
...
To be a productive agricultural economist, one must first understand basic
economic principles.
Agricultural economics uses theoretical concepts of economics to provide
answers to challenges of agriculture and agribusinesses.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics16
Questions of Agricultural Economics...
What to produce?:The first major decision relates to the quantity and the
range of goods to be produced. Since resources are limited we must choose
between different alternative collections of goods and services that may be
produced.
How to produce?:Having decided quantity and type of goods to produce,
we must next determine the techniques of production to be usede.g. labour
intensive or capital intensive.
For whom to produce?:This means how the national product is to be
distributed, i.e. who should get what & how much?
Are the resources efficiently used?:There is to be no wastage or misuse
of resourcessince they are limited & scarce.
Is there full employment of resources?:An economy must endeavor to
achieve full employment not only of labour but of all resources.
Is the sector/economy growing?:An economy should keep on expanding
or developing to maintain conditions of stability. The economy’s productive
capacity must continueto expand to provide people’s needs of people.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics17
Role of Agricultural Economics
Provides guidance to farmers (e.g. what to produce, how to produce, what to sell
and how to sell) to maximize benefits to the farmers.
Deals with optimal selection of land, labour and equipment for a farm; optimal
choice of crops to be grown & of livestock to be kept.
Provides guidance to government institutions for proper participation in the
agriculture sector (e.g. aids in designing taxation policy, agricultural export policy,
agricultural subsidy policies etc).
Concerned with distribution and/or consumption of resources, goods and
services within a society.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics18

9/6/2024
LUANAR_Introduction to Agricultural Economics4
Role of Agricultural Economists:
Microeconomic Level:
Concerned with mobilization & use of resources in the production,
processing, distribution and consumption of products in the agricultural
system:
Production economists examine demand of resources by businesses & their
supply response.
Market economists focus on the flow of agri. products through market
channels to their final destination and the determination of prices at each
stage.
Financial economists are concerned with financing needs of businesses and
the supply of capital (finances) to these firms.
Resource economists focus on the use and preservation of natural resources.
Public/Policy  economists  are  interested  on  various  government
policies/programs to farmers.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics19
Role of Agricultural Economists:
Macroeconomic Level:
Interested in how agriculture & agribusinesses can participate in
national & global markets.
Analyses how events taking place in other economic sectors affect
agribusiness firms and agriculture in general-to formulate effective
policies and interventions.
For example, agricultural economists employed by the Reserve Bank of Malawi
and Ministry of Finance analyse how changes in monetary policy affect the
price of various food commodities.
Macroeconomists employed by multinational food companies examine foreign
trade arrangements for marketing of food and fiber products
For example, one could ask:How could Malawian Agribusinesses take advantage of the
African Continental Free TradeArea (AfCFTA)?
Intro. to Agricultural Economics20
Scientific Method in Studying Economics
Economics adopts scientific method to explain how the world works:
1. Observes real world behaviour and outcomes.
2. Based on observations, formulates hypothesis-possible explanations of
cause & effects
3. Collects & analyses data to test the formulated hypotheses (in step 2).
4. Based on results in step # 3, accepts, rejects or modifies the hypothesis
5. Continues to test the hypothesis against facts. If more evidence supports the
hypothesis, the hypothesis becomesan economic theory/principle.
Economic Principles are:
Generalizations-expressed as behaviour of typical/average economic actors
(consumers or producers)
Usage of “other-things-equal assumption”(ceteris paribus)-holding all other
factors constant.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics21
Marginal Analysis
Economists are frequently concerned with understanding additional
output/benefits as a result of using a unit of input.
For instance, a micro-economist may be interested with changes in output of
agricultural production with usage of one additional bag (50Kg) of fertilizer
(input) by a farmer.
A macroeconomist, on the other hand, may focus on how a change in the tax
rate on personal income may change the nation’s output, interest rates, inflation,
and the government budget deficit.
The key word in these examples ischange.
Thus, economists are interested in understanding how changes, for
examplein price of inputs, changes in quantity of outputs supplied,
affect other prices and quantities in the economy, and how these
situations affect economic well-being of consumers, businesses, and
the economy as a whole.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics22
Economic Systems
Economic System: Defined as institutional means (arrangements put in place)
by which resources are employed (used) to satisfy human/societal needs and
desires.
(Institutionsrefer to laws, policies, practices, habits, ethics and customs of
the nation’s citizens)
Prominenteconomic systems include:
Capitalism
Socialism/Communism
Mixed.
Traditional
The major distinctive feature of these systems isthe degree of control of
economic resources-
Economic resources can be controlled by Private Economic units/entities or
Government entities or by both.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics23
Capitalism
Private individuals have free control over their time and other economic
resources, and determine exactly how to use those assets, with few
legal controls by government.
It is a self-regulating system which excludes government from economic
decisions(there is little or no government participation in economic
activities).
Capitalism depends on the will and desires of those involved in the
system.
Market forces ofdemand & supplydetermine prices, allocate
resources, and distribute income.
Market prices indicate the value of resources and economic goods.
Owners of businesses are calledCapitalists
Intro. to Agricultural Economics24

9/6/2024
LUANAR_Introduction to Agricultural Economics5
Socialism/Communism
The basis of socialism as an economic system is public ownership of
all productive resources.
Government or “state” directs all decisions regarding utilization of
resources (both human and nonhuman) by various sectors of the
economy.
Decisions are centralized by government planners.
Prices of most essential goods and services are largely set by the
government and administered to consumers and farmers.
Example:The MCP-led government under Dr. H. Kamuzu Banda
largely pursued Socialist economic policies.
Intro. to Agricultural Economics25
Mixed Economic System
This system combines aspects of Capitalism and Socialism
(Development State Policy).
That is, market forces (ofDemand and Supply) are not entirely free to
determine price in some markets but are free in other markets.
The government’s intervention in the agricultural sector, for example,
is well known(FISP, Setting of minimum/Maximum prices for
agricultural produce).
Intro. to Agricultural Economics26
Traditional System
In a traditional system, things are done without any proper formal
system and without any prescribed or known pattern.
Economic decisions are based on customs, religious beliefs and culture
that has been passed from generation to generation.
Examples:
Nomadic life of Massai People
Bushmen of Kalahari desert
Intro. to Agricultural Economics27
Some Economic Terminologies and Concepts...
1. Scarcity, 
2. Resources, 
3. Needs/Wants
4. Opportunity Cost
5. Interest rate
6. Gross National/Domestic Product
7. Demand/Supply
8. Elasticity
9. Marginal Analysis
10.Employment
11.Inflation
12.Depreciation
13.Devaluation
14.Economic/Accounting profit
15.Investment
16.Rate of return
17.Exchange rate
18.Balance of Payment
19.Trade Balance
20.Exports/Imports.
28Intro. to Agricultural Economics