

SOIL SCIENCE
(NBAT 32104)
Presented 
by
D. Sibale, PhD 
Email: dsibale@luanar.ac.mw

Chapter 2: Soil formation and classification
•Origin of soil and the rock cycle
•Soil formation process
•Soil formation factors 
•Soil classification

Origin of soil and the rock cycle
•As the soil supports the 
ecosystem, it is important to 
have a better understanding 
of the origin of soil and its 
formation
•Soil originates from rocks 
What is a rock?
•A rock is a consolidated parent 
material comprising minerals 
that are bound together
Types of rocks:
a) Igneous rocks: 
✓Formed by the cooling and hardening of molten 
magma (complex siliceous solution) from 
deeper areas of the earth 
✓The molten material that is extruded onto the 
earth surface is known as lava
✓ Examples: Quartz, Mafic (e.g Basalt), Feldspar,          
granite 
✓Rich in Silica content
b) Sedimentary rocks: 
✓These rocks are formed by either physical or 
chemical formation from degraded particles of 
other rock. 
✓The degraded materials are hardened as a result 
of compression/compaction/cementation forming 
another type of  rock.
✓Examples: Limestone, sandstone, shale
c) Metamorphic rocks:
These rocks are formed by tremendous heat and 
pressure which alter the original character of the 
previously existing rock. 
 Example: Marble
Degraded 
particles 
e.g 
sand particles

Soil formation process
Degradation
•Soil formation begins with the break-down of a rock
•The breakdown or disintegration of the rocks into 
smaller particles is referred to as weathering
•Weathering is a form of degradation 
•The process of weathering occurs through:
a)Physical weathering
b)Chemical weathering
c)Biological weathering
•The process of soil formation is 
referred to as pedogenesis
•The process of soil formation involves 
three key stages:
1.Degradation 
      (specifically, weathering)
1.Transportation
2.Deposition

Physical weathering
•Physical weathering is the break-down of rocks into smaller particles through mechanical or physical 
means, without undergoing any chemical change.
•During physical weathering, broken-down particles bear similar chemical properties/characteristics of 
the parent rock. However, the shape and size of particles change overtime
•The agents behind physical weathering include:
Frost action
Moving Water
Wind, Earthquakes & Landslides
Temperature changes

Chemical weathering
•Chemical weathering is the break-down of rocks into smaller particles through chemical 
reactions
•Types of chemical weathering
❑Carbonation
❑Oxidation
❑Dissolution
❑Hydrolysis
❑Hydration
•During chemical weathering, there is change of chemical properties/characteristics of the 
broken-down materials when compared to the original rock, and this is common in carbonation, 
oxidation, hydrolysis, and hydration.
•During chemical weathering, there is change of chemical properties/characteristics of the 
broken-down materials. Broken-down particles bear chemical properties which are different 
from the parent rock
•Silt and clay particles are the key products of chemical weathering

Chemical weathering through carbonation
Carbonation:
Calcite (Calcium 
carbonate) in 
limestone/marble 
reacts with 
carbonic acid 
forming calcium 
bicarbonate 
In the process of carbonation, calcium bicarbonate is 
produced. This compound is very soluble in water and it 
is easily washed away. 
Question:
If a rock is continuously exposed to this process, what 
do you think will happen to the rock?
Carbonate rocks 
e.g limestone 
and marble
Calcium bicarbonate 
(Ca(HCO₃)₂)
Phase 1
Phase 2

Chemical weathering through oxidation
•Oxidation is a chemical weathering process where oxygen reacts with minerals  particularly those 
containing iron and form oxides
A common indicator of 
oxidation is the 
development of a 
reddish-brown surface 
on rocks 
•Iron-rich rocks e.g igneous 
rocks, react with oxygen in the 
presence of water to form iron 
oxide (rust)
•Water facilitates the reaction 
between oxygen and ferrous iron 
(Fe²⁺) ions
•Iron oxide is softer than the 
original material hence the rock 
is weakened (the rocks crumble 
and break down more easily)

Chemical weathering through dissolution
•Dissolution involves the chemical breakdown of rocks in which soluble minerals in rocks dissolve 
easily once in contact with water and a solution is formed
•Water molecules pull the mineral's ions apart, causing the mineral to dissolve entirely
•When dissolution has occurred, soluble minerals dissolve completely into ions without forming 
new  solid compound. The original mineral simply becomes part of the dissolved solution.
•A good example of these soluble minerals is the Halite
•Halite is a soluble mineral that is rich in sodium chloride (a sedimentary rock salt). It dissolves 
easily when reacts with water

Chemical weathering through hydrolysis
•Potassium Feldspar in shale rocks contains 
potassium (K), silicon (Si), aluminum (Al), and 
oxygen (O)
•Clay minerals are composed of aluminum, 
silicon, oxygen, and hydrogen
•Hydrolysis involves the chemical 
breakdown of rocks caused by 
the reaction between silica 
minerals e.g feldspar with water 
forming new compounds.
•This reaction changes the original 
mineral into different compounds
•Some of the newly formed 
compounds are often softer than 
the original ones, making the rock 
more susceptible to further 
breakdown.

Chemical weathering through hydration
•Hydration involves a reaction in which water molecules are added to the chemical structure of a mineral 
transforming that mineral into another form
•An example of hydration is the transformation of calcium sulphate (CaSO
4
) into gypsum (CaSO
4
·2H
2
O)
•Gypsum is also referred to as the hydrated calcium sulphate 
•Calcium sulphate absorbs water and forms gypsum
•A key property of hydration is that the resulting mineral has a greater volume than the original mineral.

Biological weathering
Biological weathering is caused by living organisms
Biological & physical means:
•Plant roots penetrating on cracks of rocks
•Burrowing animals e.g moles expose rocks 
   to other weathering processes
Biological & chemical means
•Mosses and lichens  growing on surfaces of rocks 
   produce organic acidic compounds that weaken rocks

Continuation on the key stages of soil formation 
process (weathering, transportation, deposition)
Transportation 
•After the processes of weathering, the broken-down rock materials (degraded 
materials) become smaller and easier to be transported by water and wind
Water action 
Wind action 

Deposition
•The transported broken-down materials are deposited on lower areas resulting in formation of 
the loose weathered material referred to as “soil”.
•What we see at this moment has resulted from modifications to a former surface over time
•The deposited materials also become the beginning of the new rock if they are not tampered for 
a longer period of time 
•Naturally, they become cemented, metamorphosed, and melted, then return to rock status as 
igneous, metamorphic, sedimentary rocks

Group Work
Discuss the impact of weathering on agriculture and the environment? 

Factors influencing soil formation
•Soils differ from one part of the world to another, even from one part of a backyard to another 
•They differ because of the variations in the soil formation process 
•There are five major factors that influence soil formation: 
 
Climate
Organisms
Relief
Parent material
Time

Climate
How does climate influence soil formation?
•Climate influences the rate of weathering.
❑Temperature and moisture influence the speed of chemical reactions, which in turn help control 
how fast rocks weather  
❑The greater the rainfall, the faster the rate of  weathering
❑Different climates lead to variations in soil development . Soils develop faster in warm, moist 
climates and slowest in cold or arid ones. 
 

Organisms
How do organisms influence soil formation?
•Dead plants and animals decompose to form humus which leads to development of 
fertile soils
•Human activities accelerate the soil formation process
Question:
Explain how human activities accelerate the soil formation process
 

Relief or Topography
How does relief (topography) influence soil 
formation?
•Steep areas experience much erosion than flat 
areas hence there are variations in soil 
depth/layers/horizons and chemical composition
•This can be observed if soil profiles are examined 
between two different locations (steep and flat 
areas)
•This is the reason why deeper soils mostly form at 
the bottom of a hill 
 

Parent material
How does parent material influence soil formation?
•Mineral composition and rock type influence the final soil developed. For example:
❑Soils rich in calcium originate from carbonate rocks like limestone and marble
❑Sandy soils originate from sandstone
❑Clay soils originate from rocks rich in feldspar e.g shale and granite
 

Time
How does time influence soil formation?
•Soil formation is a time dependent process. Soil take 
many years to form
•The longer the parent material is exposed to soil 
formation processes, the more developed and 
matured the soil becomes
 
123
If (1) is the parent material, between (2) and 
(3), which one represents a matured soil?

Group work
1. The soil is dynamic, its components (mineral particles, water, air, organic matter,   
and organisms) change over time. Provide a detailed explanation to back-up this 
statement.
2. Factors affecting soil formation do not act in isolation;they constantly interact and 
influence each other. To support the statement, provide a detailed explanation 
with necessary examples.
 