

 
DIGITAL NOTES 
ON CLOUD 
COMPUTING 
(R18A0523) 
B. TECH IV YEAR – I SEM (R18) (2020-2021) 
 
 
MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF 
ENGINEERING &TECHNOLOGY 
(MRCET) 
(Autonomous Institution – UGC, Govt. of India) 
 
Recognized under 2(f) and 12 (B) of UGC ACT 
1956 
(Affiliated to JNTUH, Hyderabad, Approved by AICTE - Accredited by NBA & NAAC – 
‘A’ Grade - ISO 9001:2015 Certified) 
 
Maisammaguda, Dhulapally (Post Via. Hakimpet), Secunderabad – 500100, Telangana 
State, India

 
MALLA REDDY COLLEGE OF ENGINEERING AND TECHNOLOGY 
IV Year B.Tech IT –ISem                   L T/P/DC 
            3 -/-/- 3 
(R18A0523) CLOUD COMPUTING 
Objectives 
1. To understand the various distributed system models and evolving computing 
paradigms 
2. To gain knowledge in virtualization of computer resources 
3. To realize the reasons for migrating into cloud 
4. To introduce the various levels of services that can be achieved by a cloud.  
5. To describe the security aspects in cloud and the services offered by a cloud. 
UNIT- I 
Cloud  Computing  Fundamentals:  Definition  of  Cloud  computing,  Roots  of  Cloud 
Computing, Layers and Types of Clouds, Desired Features of a Cloud, Cloud Infrastructure 
Management,  Infrastructure  as  a  Service  Providers,  Platform  as  a  Service  Providers. 
Computing  Paradigms:  High-Performance  Computing,  Parallel  Computing,  Distributed 
Computing, Cluster Computing, Grid Computing. 
 
UNIT- II 
Migrating into a Cloud: Introduction, Broad Approaches to Migrating into the Cloud, the 
Seven-Step  Model  of  Migration  into  a  Cloud,  Enriching  the  ‘Integration  as  a  Service’ 
Paradigm for the Cloud Era, the Onset of Knowledge Era the Evolution of SaaS, Evolution of 
Saas. 
 
UNIT- III 
Infrastructure as a Service (IAAS) & Platform (PAAS): Virtual machines provisioning 
and Migration services, Virtual Machines Provisioning and Manageability, Virtual Machine 
Migration  Services,  VM  Provisioning  and  Migration  in  Action.  On  the  Management  of 
Virtual  machines  for  Cloud  Infrastructures-  Aneka—Integration  of  Private  and  Public 
Clouds. 
 
UNIT- IV 
Software as a Service (SAAS) &Data Security in the Cloud: Software as a Service 
SAAS), Google App Engine – Centralizing Email Communications- Collaborating via Web-
Based Communication Tools-An Introduction to the idea of Data Security. 
 
UNIT- V 
SLA Management in cloud computing: Traditional Approaches to SLO Management, Types 
of SLA, Life Cycle of SLA, SLA Management in Cloud. 
 

 
  1 
TEXTBOOKS: 
 
1. Cloud Computing Principles and Paradigms, by Rajkumar Buyya 
2. Essentials of cloud Computing: K. Chandrasekhran, CRC press, 2014 
3. Michael Miller, Cloud Computing: Web-Based Applications That Change the Way You 
Work and Collaborate Online, Que Publishing, August 2008. 
4. Cloud Computing, A Practical Approach, Anthony T Velte, Toby J Velte, Robert 
Elsenpeter, TMH 
 
Outcomes:  
 
1. Ability to understand various service delivery models of a cloud computing 
2. Ability to understand the ways in which the cloud can be programmed and deployed. 
3. Ability to understand the virtualization and cloud computing concepts 
4. Assess the comparative advantages and disadvantages of Virtualization technology 
5. Analyze authentication, confidentiality and privacy issues in cloud computing 
6. Identify security implications in cloud computing 
 
Reference Books:  
1. Cloud Computing: A Practical Approach, Anthony T.Velte, Toby J.Velte, Robert 
Elsenpeter, Tata McGraw Hill,rp2011.  
2. Enterprise Cloud Computing, Gautam Shroff, Cambridge University Press,2010.  
3. Cloud Computing: Implementation, Management and Security, John W.Rittinghouse, 
James F.Ransome, CRC Press,rp2012. 
 4. Cloud Application Architectures: Building Applications and Infrastructure in the Cloud, 
George Reese, O‘reilly, SPD,rp2011.  
5. Cloud Security and Privacy: An Enterprise Perspective on Risks and Compliance, Tim 
Mather, Subra Kumaraswamy, Shahed Latif, O‘Reilly, SPD, rp2011 
 
  

 
  2 
INDEX 
UNIT Topics Page No 
 
 
 
I
 
 Definition of Cloud computing 
3 
 Roots of Cloud Computing 
6 
 Layers and Types of Clouds 
10 
 Desired Features of a Cloud 
12 
 Cloud Infrastructure Management 
13 
 Infrastructure as a Service Providers 
19 
 Computing Paradigms 
25 
 
 
II 
 Migrating into a Cloud: Introduction 
29 
 Broad Approaches to Migrating into the Cloud 
30 
 Seven-Step Model of Migration into a Cloud 
31 
 Enriching the ‘Integration as a Service’ Paradigm for the Cloud Era 
32 
 Evolution of Saas. 
38 
 
III 
 Infrastructure as a Service (IAAS) & Platform (PAAS): 
42 
 Virtual machines provisioning and Migration services 
51 
 Aneka—Integration of Private and Public Clouds. 
61 
 
 
IV 
 Software as a Service (SAAS) 
66 
 Google App Engine 
68 
 Centralizing Email Communications Collaborating via Web-Based 
71 
 An Introduction to the idea of Data Security 
72 
 
 
 
V
 
 SLA Management in cloud computing 
77 
 Traditional Approaches to SLO Management 
78 
 Types of SLA 
78 
 Life Cycle of SLA 
79 
 SLA Management in Cloud 
76 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  3 
 
UNIT – I 
Cloud  Computing  Fundamentals:  Definition  of  Cloud  computing,  Roots  of  Cloud 
Computing, Layers and Types of Clouds, Desired Features of a Cloud, Cloud Infrastructure 
Management,  Infrastructure  as  a  Service  Providers,  Platform  as  a  Service  Providers. 
Computing  Paradigms:  High-Performance  Computing,  Parallel  Computing,  Distributed 
Computing, Cluster Computing, Grid Computing. 
Introduction to Cloud Computing: 
What is the cloud: "The cloud" refers to servers that are accessed over the Internet, and the 
software and databases that run on those servers. Cloud servers are in data centres all over the 
world. By using cloud computing, users and companies do not have to manage physical 
servers themselves or run software applications on their own machines. 
 
The cloud enables users to access the same files and applications from almost any device, 
because the computing and storage takes place on servers in a data centre, instead of locally 
on the user device. Therefore, a user can log into their Instagram account on a new phone 
after their old phone breaks and still find their old account in place, with all their photos, 
videos, and conversation history. It works the same way with cloud email providers like 
Gmail or Microsoft Office 365, and with cloud storage providers like Dropbox or Google 
Drive.  
For businesses,  switching  to  cloud  computing  removes  some  IT  costs  and overhead:  for 
instance, they no longer need to update and maintain their own servers, as the cloud vendor 
they are using will do that. This especially makes an impact for small businesses that may not 
have  been  able  to  afford  their  own  internal  infrastructure  but  can  outsource  their 
infrastructure needs affordably via the cloud. The cloud can also make it easier for companies 
to operate internationally, because employees and customers can access the same files and 
applications from any location. 

 
  4 
Definition of Cloud Computing: 
The term “Cloud Computing” refers to services provided by the cloud that is responsible for 
delivering of computing services such as servers, storage, databases, networking, software, 
analytics, intelligence, and more, over the Cloud (Internet). 
Cloud  computing  applies  a  virtualized  platform  with  elastic  resources  on  demand  by 
provisioning hardware, software, and data sets dynamically 
 
Cloud  Computing  provides  an  alternative  to  the  on-premises  data  center.  With  an  on-
premises  data  center,  we  must  manage  everything,  such  as  purchasing  and  installing 
hardware, virtualization, installing the operating system, and any other required applications, 
setting up the network, configuring the firewall, and setting up storage for data. After doing 
all the set-up, we become responsible for maintaining it through its entire lifecycle. 
However, if we choose Cloud Computing, a cloud vendor is responsible for the hardware 
purchase and maintenance. They also provide a wide variety of software and platform as a 
service. We can take any required services on rent. The cloud computing services are charged 
based on usage. 
 
The cloud environment provides an easily accessible online portal that makes handy for the 
user to manage the compute, storage, network, and application resources. Some of the cloud 
service providers are in the following figure. 

 
  5 
 
Advantages of cloud computing: 
1. Cost: It reduces the huge capital costs of buying hardware and software. 
2. Speed: Resources can be accessed in minutes, typically within a few clicks. 
3. Scalability: We can increase or decrease the requirement of resources according to 
the business requirements. 
4. Productivity: While using cloud computing, we put less operational effort. We do not 
need to apply patching, as well as no need to maintain hardware and software. So, in 
this way, the IT team can be more productive and focus on achieving business goals. 
5. Reliability: Backup and recovery of data are less expensive and extremely fast for 
business continuity. 
6. Security: Many cloud vendors offer a broad set of policies, technologies, and controls 
that strengthen our data security. 
Cloud computing shares characteristics with: 
1. Client–server model—Client–server computing refers broadly to any distributed 
application that distinguishes between service providers (servers) and service 
requestors (clients).  
2. Grid computing—A form of distributed and parallel computing, whereby a 'super 
and virtual computer' is composed of a cluster of networked, loosely coupled 
computers acting in concert to perform very large tasks. 
3. Fog computing—Distributed computing paradigm that provides data, compute, 
storage and application services closer to the client or near-user edge devices, such as 
network routers. Furthermore, fog computing handles data at the network level, on 
smart devices and on the end-user client-side (e.g., mobile devices), instead of 
sending data to a remote location for processing. 
4. Mainframe computer—Powerful computers used mainly by large organizations for 
critical applications, typically bulk data processing such as census; industry and 
consumer statistics; police and secret intelligence services; enterprise resource 
planning; and financial transaction processing. 
5. Utility computing—The packaging of computing resources, such as computation and 
storage, as a metered service similar to a traditional public utility, such as electricity. 

 
  6 
6. Peer-to-peer—A distributed architecture without the need for central coordination. 
Participants are both suppliers and consumers of resources (in contrast to the 
traditional client-server model). 
7. Green computing—Study and practice of environmentally sustainable computing or 
IT. 
8. Cloud sandbox—A live, isolated computer environment in which a program, code or 
file can run without affecting the application in which it runs. 
Characteristics of Cloud Computing 
1. Agility for organizations  
2. Cost reductions, Centralization of infrastructure in locations with lower costs. 
3. Device and location independence, which means no maintenance, required. 
4. Pay-per-use means utilization and efficiency improvements for systems that are often 
only 10–20% utilized. 
5. Performances are being monitored by IT experts i.e., from the service provider end. 
6. Productivity increases which results in multiple users who can work on the same data 
simultaneously.  
7. Time may be saved as information does not need to be re-entered when fields are 
matched 
8. Availability improves with the use of multiple redundant sites 
9. Scalability and elasticity via dynamic ("on-demand") provisioning of resources on a 
fine-grained, self-service basis in near real-time without users having to engineer for 
peak loads.  
10. Self-service interface. 
11. Resources that  are abstracted or virtualized. 
12. Security can improve due to centralization of data 
The National Institute of Standards and Technology's definition of cloud computing 
identifies "five essential characteristics": 
1. On-demand self-service.  
2. Broad network access.  
3. Resource pooling.  
4. Rapid elasticity.  
5. Measured service.  
ROOTS OF CLOUD COMPUTING 
We can track the roots of clouds computing by observing the advancement of several 
technologies,  especially  in  hardware  (virtualization,  multi-core  chips),  Internet 
technologies  (Web  services,  service-oriented  architectures,  Web  2.0),  distributed 
computing (clusters,  grids),  and  systems  management  (autonomic  computing,  data 
center  automation).  Figure  1.1  shows  the  convergence  of  technology  fields  that 

 
  7 
significantly advanced and contributed to the advent  of cloud computing.
 
The emergence of cloud computing itself is closely linked to the maturity of such 
technologies. We present a closer look at the technologies that form the base of cloud 
computing, with the aim of providing a clearer picture of the cloud ecosystem.
 
 
1. 
From Mainframes to Clouds
 
We are currently experiencing a switch in the IT world, from in-house generated 
computing power into utility-supplied computing resources delivered over the 
Internet as Web services. This trend is like what occurred about a century ago 
when factories, which used to generate their own electric power, realized that it 
is  was  cheaper  just  plugging  their  machines  into  the  newly  formed  electric 
power grid.
 
Computing delivered as a utility can be defined as “on demand delivery of 
infrastructure, applications, and business processes in a security-rich, shared, 
scalable, and based computer environment over the Internet for a fee”
 
2. 
SOA, Web Services, Web 2.0, and Mashups
 
The  emergence of Web  services  (WS)  open  standards  has significantly  con- 
tributed to advances in the domain of software integration. Web services can 
glue together applications running on different messaging product plat- forms, 
enabling information from one application to be made available to others, and 
enabling internal applications to be made available over the Internet. 
WS  standards  have  been  created  on  top  of  existing  ubiquitous 
technologies such as HTTP and XML, thus providing a common mechanism for 
delivering  services,  making  them  ideal  for  implementing  a  service-oriented 
architecture (SOA). The purpose of a SOA is to address requirements of loosely 
coupled, standards-based, and protocol-independent distributed computing. In a 
SOA, software resources are packaged as “services,” which are well-defined, 
self-  contained  modules  that  provide  standard  business  functionality  and  are 
independent of the state or context of other services. Services are described     in 
a standard definition language and have a published interface
 

 
  8 
Many  service  providers,  such  as  Amazon,  delicious,  Facebook,  and 
Google, make their service APIs publicly accessible using standard protocols 
such as SOAP and REST. Consequently, one can put an idea of a fully functional 
Web application into practice just by gluing pieces with few lines of code.
 
1. 
Grid Computing
 
Grid computing enables aggregation of distributed resources and transparently 
access to them. Most production grids such as TeraGrid and EGEE seek to share 
compute  and  storage  resources  distributed  across  different  administrative 
domains,  with  their  focus  being  speeding  up  a  broad  range  of  scientific 
applications, such as climate modeling, drug design, and protein analysis.
 
A key aspect of the grid vision realization has been building standard Web 
services-based protocols that allow distributed resources to be “discovered, 
accessed, allocated, monitored, accounted for, and billed for, etc., and in 
general  managed  as  a  single  virtual  system.”  The  Open  Grid  Services 
Architecture (OGSA) addresses this need for standardization by defining a set 
of core capabilities and behaviors that address key concerns in grid systems.
 
 
Virtualization technology has been identified as the perfect fit to issues that have 
caused frustration when using grids, such as hosting many dissimilar software 
applications  on  a  single  physical  platform.  In  this  direction,  some  research 
projects (e.g., Globus Virtual Workspaces) aimed at evolving grids to support an 
additional layer to virtualize computation, storage, and network resources.
 
 
2. Utility Computing 
With increasing popularity and usage, large grid installations have faced new 
problems, such as excessive spikes in demand for resources coupled with strategic 
and adversarial behavior by users. Initially, grid resource management techniques 
did not ensure fair and equitable access to resources in many systems. Traditional 
metrics (throughput, waiting time, and slowdown) failed to capture the more subtle 
requirements of users. There were no real incentives for users to be flexible about 
resource requirements or job deadlines, nor provisions to accommodate users with 
urgent work. 
In utility computing environments, users assign a “utility” value to their jobs, 
where  utility  is  a  fixed  or  time-varying  valuation  that  captures  various  QoS 
constraints (deadline, importance, satisfaction). The valuation is the amount they are 
willing to pay a service provider to satisfy their demands.   The service providers 
then attempt to maximize their own utility, where said utility may directly correlate 
with their profit. Providers can choose to prioritize high yield (i.e., profit per unit of 
resource) user jobs, leading to a scenario where shared systems are viewed as a 
marketplace, where users compete for resources based on the perceived utility or 
value of their jobs. Further information and comparison of these utility computing 
environments are available in an extensive survey of these platforms 

 
  9 
Virtual Machine 1
 
User software
 
 
Virtual Machine 2
 
User software
 
Facebook App
 
Virtual Machine N
 
User software
 
App A
 
App X
 
Data 
base
 
Web 
Server
 
Java
 
Ruby on 
Rails
 
App B
 
App Y
 
Linux
 
Guest OS
 
Virtual Machine Monitor (Hypervisor)
 
Hardware
 
 
3. 
Hardware Virtualization
 
Cloud computing services are usually backed by large-scale data centers 
composed of thousands of computers. Such data centers are built to serve many 
users  and  host  many  disparate  applications.  For  this  purpose,  hardware 
virtualization can be considered as a perfect fit to overcome most operational 
issues of data center building and maintenance.
 
 
The idea of virtualizing a computer system resources, including processors, 
memory,  and  I/O  devices,  has  been  well  established  for  decades,  aiming  at 
improving sharing and utilization of computer systems. Hardware virtualization 
allows  running  multiple  operating  systems  and  software  stacks  on  a  single 
physical platform. As depicted in Figure 1.2, a software layer, the virtual machine 
monitor  (VMM),  also  called  a  hypervisor,  mediates  access  to  the  physical 
hardware  presenting  to  each  guest  operating  system  a  virtual  machine  (VM), 
which is a set of virtual platform interfaces
 
 
 
Email Server     Facebook App 
FIGURE 1.2. A hardware virtualized server hosting three virtual machines, each one running distinct 
operating system and user level software stack. 
 Several VMM platforms exist that are the basis of many utilities or cloud computing 
environments.  The  most  notable  ones,  VMWare,  Xen,  and  KVM,  are  outlined  in  the 
following sections. 
VMWare ESXi – VMware is a pioneer in the virtualization market. Its ecosys- tem of tools 
ranges from server and desktop virtualization to high-level management tools. ESXi is a 
VMM 
(Virtual Machine Manager) 
from VMWare. It is a bare-metal hypervisor, meaning 
that it installs directly on the physical server, whereas others may require a host operating 
system.  It  provides  advanced  virtualization  techniques  of  processor,  memory,  and  I/O. 
Especially, through memory ballooning and page sharing, it can overcommit memory, thus 
increasing the density of VMs inside a single physical server. 
Xen—The Xen hypervisor started as an open-source project and has served as a base to other 
virtualization  products,  both  commercial  and  open-source.  It  has  pioneered  the  para-
virtualization concept, on which the guest operating system, by means of a specialized kernel, 
can interact with the hypervisor, thus significantly improving performance. In addition to an 

 
  10 
open-source distribution, Xen currently forms the base of commercial hypervisors of several 
vendors, most notably Citrix XenServer and Oracle VM. 
KVM—The kernel-based virtual machine (KVM) is a Linux virtualization subsystem. Is has 
been part of the mainline Linux kernel since version 2.6.20, thus being natively supported by 
several distributions. In addition, activities such as memory management and scheduling are 
carried  out  by  existing  kernel  features,  thus  making  KVM  simpler  and  smaller  than 
hypervisors that take control of the entire machine. 
KVM leverages hardware-assisted virtualization, which improves performance and 
allows  it  to  support  unmodified  guest  operating  systems.  currently,  it  supports  several 
versions of Windows, Linux, and UNIX. 
4. 
Virtual Appliances and the Open Virtualization Format
 
An  application  combined  with  the  environment  needed  to  run  it  (operating 
system,  libraries,  compilers,  databases,  application  containers,  and  so  forth)  is 
referred to as a “virtual appliance. Packaging application environments in the shape 
of virtual appliances eases software customization, configuration, and patching and 
improves portability. Most commonly, an appliance is shaped as a VM disk image 
associated  with  hardware  requirements,  and  it  can  be  readily  deployed  in  a 
hypervisor.
 
OVF’s extensibility has encouraged additions relevant to management of data 
centers and clouds. Mathews et al. have devised virtual machine contracts (VMC) 
as an extension to OVF. A VMC aids in communicating and managing the complex 
expectations that VMs have of their runtime environment and vice versa. A simple 
example  of  a  VMC  is  when  a cloud  consumer wants to specify  minimum  and 
maximum amounts of a resource that a VM needs to function. similarly, the cloud 
provider could express resource limits to bound resource consumption and costs.
 
5. 
Autonomic Computing
 
Autonomic  or self-managing, systems rely on monitoring probes and gauges 
(sensors),  on  an  adaptation  engine  (autonomic  manager)  for  computing 
optimizations based on monitoring data, and on effectors to carry out changes on the 
system. IBM’s Autonomic Computing Initiative has contributed to define the four 
properties of autonomic systems: self-configuration, self- optimization, self-healing, 
and  self-protection.  IBM  has  also  suggested  a  reference  model  for  autonomic 
control  loops  of  autonomic  managers,  called  MAPE-K  (Monitor  Analyze  Plan 
Execute—Knowledge)
 
LAYERS AND TYPES OF CLOUDS 
Cloud computing services are divided into three classes, according to the abstraction 
level of the capability provided and the service model of providers, namely: 
1. Infrastructure as a Service, 
2. Platform as a Service, and Software as a Service. 

 
  11 
Infrastructure as a Service
 
 A cloud infrastructure enables on-demand provisioning of servers running several 
choices of operating systems and a customized software stack. Infrastructure services are 
considered as the bottom layer of cloud computing systems. Offering virtualized resources 
(computation, storage, and communication) on demand is known as Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS). 
One of the best examples is Amazon Web Services mainly offers IaaS, which in 
the case of its EC2 service means offering VMs with a software stack that can be 
customized similar to how an ordinary physical server would be customized. 
Platform as a Service
 
A cloud platform offers an environment on which developers create and deploy 
applications and do not necessarily need to know how many processors or how much 
memory that applications will be using. In addition, multiple program- ming models 
and specialized services (e.g., data access, authentication, and payments) are offered as 
building blocks to new applications.
 
Google  AppEngine,  an  example  of  Platform  as  a  Service,  offers  a  scalable 
environment for developing and hosting Web applications, which should be written in 
specific programming languages such as Python or Java, and use the services’ own 
proprietary structured object data store. 
Software as a Service
 
Traditional desktop applications such as word processing and spreadsheet can 
now be accessed as a service in the Web. This model of delivering applications, known 
as Software as a Service (SaaS), alleviates the burden of software maintenance for 
customers and simplifies development and testing for providers.
 
Salesforce.com, which relies on the SaaS model, offers business productivity 
applications  (CRM)  that  reside  completely  on  their  servers,  allowing  customers  to 
customize and access applications on demand.
 
Deployment Models
 

 
  12 
Although  cloud  computing  has  emerged  mainly  from  the  appearance  of  public 
computing utilities, other deployment models, with variations in physical location 
and distribution, have been adopted. In this sense, regardless of its service class, a 
cloud can be classified as public, private, community, or hybrid based on model of 
deployment as shown figure below.
 
Public cloud & Private cloud: Public cloud as a “cloud made available in a pay-as-
you-go  manner  to  the  general  public”. Private cloud as  “internal  data  center  of  a 
business or other organization, not made available to the general public.”
 
In  most  cases,  establishing  a  private  cloud  means  restructuring  an  existing 
infrastructure by adding virtualization and cloud-like interfaces. This allows users to 
interact with the local data center while experiencing the same advantages of public 
clouds, most notably self-service interface, privileged access to virtual servers, and 
per-usage metering and billing. 
A community cloud is “shared by several organizations and supports a specific 
community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and 
compliance considerations).”
 
A hybrid  cloud takes  shape  when  a  private  cloud  is  supplemented  with 
computing capacity from public clouds. The approach of temporarily renting capacity 
to handle spikes in load is known as “cloud-bursting”
 
DESIRED FEATURES OF A CLOUD 
Certain features of a cloud are essential to enable services that truly represent the 
cloud-computing  model  and  satisfy  expectations  of  consumers,  and  cloud  offerings 
must be having following features: 
1. Self-service   
2. Per-usage metered and billed 
3. Elastic,  
4. Customizable. 
The following are the features that are explained in detail. 

 
  13 
1. 
Self-Service
 
Consumers of cloud computing services expect on-demand, nearly instant access 
to resources. To support this expectation, clouds must allow self-service access so 
that customers can request, customize, pay, and use services without intervention 
of human operators.
 
2. 
Per-Usage Metering and Billing
 
Cloud computing  eliminates  up-front  commitment  by  users,  allowing  them  to 
request and use only the necessary amount. Services must be priced on a short- 
term basis (e.g., by the hour), allowing users to release (and not pay for) resources 
as soon as they are not needed. For these reasons, clouds must implement features 
to  allow  efficient  trading  of  service  such  as  pricing,  accounting,  and  billing. 
Metering should be done accordingly for different types of service (e.g., storage, 
processing, and bandwidth) and usage promptly reported, thus providing greater 
transparency.
 
3. 
Elasticity
 
Cloud computing gives the illusion of infinite computing resources available on 
demand.  Therefore,  users  expect  clouds  to  rapidly  provide  resources  in  any 
quantity at any time. In particular, it is expected that the additional resources can 
be (a) provisioned, possibly automatically, when an application load increases and 
(b) released when load decreases (scale up and down).
 
4. 
Customization
 
In a multi-tenant cloud a great disparity between user needs is often the case. 
Thus, resources rented from the cloud must be highly customizable. In the case of 
infrastructure services, customization means allowing users to deploy specialized 
virtual appliances and to be given privileged (root) access to the virtual servers. 
Other service classes (PaaS and SaaS) offer less flexibility and are not suitable for 
general-purpose computing, but still are expected to provide a certain level of 
customization.
 
CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURE MANAGEMENT 
A key challenge IaaS providers face when building a cloud infrastructure is managing 
physical and virtual resources, namely servers, storage, and net- works, in a holistic 
fashion.  
The software toolkit responsible for this orchestration is called a virtual infrastructure 
manager (VIM). This type of software resembles a traditional operating system—but 
instead  of  dealing  with  a  single  computer,  it  aggregates  resources  from  multiple 
computers, presenting a uniform view to user and applications. Other terms include 
infrastructure sharing software and virtual infra- structure engine. 

 
  14 
There are two categories of tools used to manage cloud they are  
5. Cloud toolkits—includes those that “expose a remote and secure interface for 
creating, controlling and monitoring virtualize resources,” but do not specialize 
in VI management.  
6. The  virtual  infrastructure  managers—provide  advanced  features  such  as 
automatic load balancing and server consolidation, but do not expose remote 
cloud-like interfaces.  
The availability of a remote cloud-like interface and the ability of managing many users 
and their permissions are the primary features that would distinguish “cloud toolkits” 
from “VIMs.” However, here we place both categories of tools under the same group 
(of the VIMs) and, when applicable, we highlight the availability of a remote interface 
as a feature. 
Virtually all VIMs we investigated present a set of basic features related to 
managing the life cycle of VMs, including networking groups of VMs together and 
setting up virtual disks for VMs. These basic features pretty much define whether a tool 
can be used in practical cloud deployments or not. On the other hand, only a handful of 
software present advanced features (e.g., high availability) which allow them to be used 
in large-scale production clouds. 
Features 
We now present a list of both basic and advanced features that are usually available in 
VIMs. 
 
Virtualization Support— The multi-tenancy aspect of clouds requires multiple customers 
with disparate requirements to be served by a single hardware infrastructure. Virtualized 
resources (CPUs, memory, etc.) can be sized and resized with certain flexibility. These 
features make hardware virtualization, the ideal technology to create a virtual infrastructure 
that partitions a data center among multiple tenants. 
 
Self-Service, On-Demand Resource Provisioning— Self-service access to resources has 
been perceived as one the most attractive features of clouds. This feature enables users to 
directly obtain services from clouds, such as spawning the creation of a server and tailoring 
its software, configurations, and security policies, without interacting with a human system 
administrator.  This  capability  eliminates  the  need  for  more  time-consuming,  labor-
intensive,  human-  driven  procurement  processes  familiar  to  many  in  IT.  Therefore, 
exposing a self-service interface, through which users can easily interact with the system, is 
a highly desirable feature of a Vi manager. 
 
Multiple Backend Hypervisors— Different virtualization models and tools offer different 
benefits,  drawbacks,  and  limitations.  Thus,  some  Vi  managers  provide  a  uniform 
management layer regardless of the virtualization technology used.  
This  characteristic  is  more  visible  in  open-source  Vi  managers,  which  usually  provide 

 
  15 
pluggable drivers to interact with multiple hypervisors. In this direction, the aim of libvirt 
is  to  provide  a  uniform  API  that  Vi  managers  can  use  to  manage  domains  (a  VM  or 
container running an instance of an operating system) in virtualized nodes using standard 
operations that abstract hypervisor specific calls. 
 
Storage  Virtualization—  Virtualizing  storage  means  abstracting  logical  storage  from 
physical storage. By consolidating all available storage devices in a data center, it allows 
creating virtual disks independent from device and location. Storage devices are commonly 
organized in a storage area network (SAN) and attached to servers via protocols such as 
Fibre  Channel,  iSCSI,  and  NFS;  a  storage  controller  provides  the  layer  of  abstraction 
between virtual and physical storage. 
In  the  VI  management  sphere,  storage  virtualization  support  is  often  restricted  to 
commercial products of companies such as VMWare and Citrix.  
 
Interface to Public Clouds— Researchers have perceived that extending the capacity of a 
local  in-house  computing  infrastructure  by  borrowing  resources  from  public  clouds  is 
advantageous. In this fashion, institutions can make good use of their available resources 
and, in case of spikes in demand, extra load can be offloaded to rented resources. 
A VI manager can be used in a hybrid cloud setup if it offers a driver to manage the life 
cycle of virtualized resources obtained from external cloud providers. To the applications, 
the use of leased resources must ideally be transparent. 
 
Virtual Networking— Virtual networks allow creating an isolated network on top of a 
physical infrastructure independently from physical topology and locations. A virtual LAN 
(VLAN)  allows  isolating  traffic  that  shares  a  switched  network,  allowing  VMs  to  be 
grouped into the same broadcast domain. Additionally, a VLAN can be configured to block 
traffic  originated  from  VMs  from  other  networks.  Similarly,  the  VPN  (virtual  private 
network) concept is used to describe a secure and private overlay network on top of a public 
network (most commonly the public Internet) 
Support for creating and configuring virtual networks to group VMs placed throughout a 
data center is provided by most VI managers. Additionally, VI managers that interface with 
public clouds often support secure VPNs connecting local and remote VMs. 
 
 
 
Dynamic  Resource  Allocation—  In  cloud  infrastructures,  where    applications    have 
variable and dynamic needs, capacity management and demand prediction are especially 
complicated. This fact triggers the need for dynamic resource allocation aiming at obtaining 
a timely match of supply and demand. 
Energy  consumption  reduction  and  better  management  of  SLAs  can  be  achieved  by 
dynamically remapping VMs to physical machines at regular intervals. Machines that are 
not assigned any VM can be turned off or put on a low power state.  
A number of VI managers include a dynamic resource allocation feature that continuously 
monitors utilization across resource pools and reallocates avail- able resources among VMs 
according to application needs. 
 
Virtual Clusters— Several VI managers can holistically manage groups of VMs. This 

 
  16 
feature is useful for provisioning computing virtual clusters on demand, and interconnected 
VMs for multi-tier Internet applications. 
 
Reservation and Negotiation Mechanism— When users request computational resources 
to available at a specific time, requests are termed Advance reservations (AR), in contrast 
to best-effort requests, when users request resources whenever available [54]. To support 
complex  requests,  such  as  AR,  a  VI  manager  must  allow  users  to  “lease”  resources 
expressing more complex terms (e.g., the period of time of a reservation). This is especially 
useful in clouds on which resources are scarce; since not all requests may be satisfied 
immediately, they can benefit of VM placement strategies that support queues, priorities, 
and Advance reservations. 
Additionally, leases may be negotiated and renegotiated, allowing provider and consumer to 
modify a lease or present counter proposals until an agreement is reached. This feature is 
illustrated by the case in which an AR request for a given slot cannot be satisfied, but the 
provider can offer a distinct slot that is still satisfactory to the user.  
 
High  Availability  and  Data  Recovery—  The  high  availability  (HA)  feature  of  VI 
managers aims at minimizing application downtime and preventing business disruption. A 
few VI managers accomplish this by providing a failover mechanism, which detects failure 
of both physical and virtual servers and restarts VMs on healthy physical servers. This style 
of HA protects from host, but not VM, failures. 
Data  Recovery  means  data  backup  in  clouds  should  consider  the  high  data  volume 
involved in VM management. Frequent backup of a large number of VMs, each one with 
multiple virtual disks attached, should be done with minimal interference in the systems 
performance.  In  this  sense,  some  VI  managers  offer  data  protection  mechanisms  that 
perform incremental backups of VM images. The backup workload is often assigned to 
proxies, thus offloading production server and reducing network overhead. 
Case Studies
 
In  this  section,  we  describe  the  main  features  of  the  most  popular  VI  managers 
available.  Only  the  most  prominent  and  distinguishing  features  of  each  tool  are 
discussed in detail. A  detailed side-by-side feature  comparison  of VI managers is 
presented in Table 1.1.
 
 
Apache  VCL: The  Virtual  Computing  project  has  been  incepted  in  2004  by 
researchers at the North Carolina State University as a way to provide customized 
environments to computer lab users. The software compo- nents that support NCSU’s 
initiative  have  been  released  as  open-source  and  incorporated  by  the  Apache 
Foundation.
 
Since its inception, the main objective of VCL has been providing desktop (virtual 
lab) and HPC computing environments anytime, in a flexible cost- effective way and 
with minimal intervention of IT staff. In this sense, VCL was one of the first projects 
to create a tool with features such as: self-service Web portal, to reduce administrative 
burden;  advance  reservation  of  capacity,  to  provide  resources  during  classes;  and 
deployment of customized machine images on multiple computers, to provide clusters 
on demand.
 

 
  17 
In  summary,  Apache  VCL  provides  the  following  features:  (i)  multi-platform 
controller, based on Apache/PHP; (ii) Web portal and XML-RPC interfaces;
 
(iii) support for VMware hypervisors (ESX, ESXi, and Server); (iv) virtual networks; 
(v) virtual clusters; and (vi) advance reservation of capacity.
 
 
AppLogic: AppLogic is a commercial VI manager, the flagship product of 3tera Inc. 
from California, USA. The company has labeled this product as a Grid Operating 
System.
 
AppLogic provides a fabric to manage clusters of virtualized servers, focusing 
on managing multi-tier Web applications. It views an entire applica-  tion  as  a 
collection  of  components  that  must  be  managed  as  a  single  entity.  Several 
components such as firewalls, load balancers, Web servers, application servers, and 
database servers can be set up and linked together. Whenever the application is 
started, the system manufactures and assembles the virtual infrastructure required 
to run it. Once the application is stopped, AppLogic tears down the infrastructure 
built for it.
 
AppLogic offers dynamic appliances to add functionality such as Disaster Recovery 
and Power optimization to applications. The key differential of this approach is that 
additional functionalities are implemented as another pluggable appliance instead of 
being added as a core functionality of the VI manager.
 
In  summary,  3tera  AppLogic  provides  the  following  features:  Linux-based 
controller;  CLI  and  GUI  interfaces;  Xen  backend;  Global  Volume  Store  (GVS) 
storage virtualization; virtual networks; virtual clusters; dynamic resource allocation; 
high availability; and data protection. 
 
Citrix  Essentials:  The  Citrix  Essentials  suite  is  one  the  most  feature  complete  VI 
management software available, focusing on management and automation of data centers. It 
is  essentially  a  hypervisor-agnostic  solution,  currently  supporting  Citrix  XenServer  and 
Microsoft  Hyper-V.  Citrix  Essentials  provides  the  following  features:  Windows-  based 
controller; GUI, CLI, Web portal, and XML-RPC interfaces which support for XenServer 
and  Hyper-V  hypervisors.  Citrix  Storage  Link  storage  virtualization;  virtual  networks; 
dynamic resource allocation; three-level high avail- ability (i.e., recovery by VM restart, 
recovery by activating paused duplicate VM, and running duplicate VM continuously) [58]; 
data protection with Citrix Consolidated Backup.  
 
Enomaly ECP: The Enomaly Elastic Computing Platform, in its most complete edition, 
offers most features a service provider needs to build an   IaaS cloud.  
Most notably, ECP Service Provider Edition offers a Web-based customer dashboard 
that allows users to fully control the life cycle of VMs. Usage accounting is performed in 
real  time  and  can  be  viewed  by  users.  Similar to  the functionality  of virtual  appliance 
marketplaces, ECP allows providers and  users to package and exchange applications.  
In summary, Enomaly ECP provides the following features: Linux-based controller; 
Web portal and Web services (REST) interfaces; Xen back-end; interface to the Amazon 
EC2 public cloud; virtual networks; virtual clusters (ElasticValet).  
 
Eucalyptus: The Eucalyptus framework was one of the first open-source projects to focus 
on building IaaS clouds. It has been developed with the intent of providing an open-source 

 
  18 
implementation nearly identical in functionality to Amazon Web Services APIs. Therefore, 
users can interact with a Eucalyptus cloud using the same tools they use to access Amazon 
EC2. It also distinguishes itself from other tools because it provides a storage cloud API—
emulating the Amazon S3 API—for storing general user data and VM images.  
In summary, Eucalyptus provides the following features: Linux-based con- troller 
with  administration  Web  portal;  EC2-compatible  (SOAP,  Query)  and  S3-  compatible 
(SOAP,  REST)  CLI  and  Web  portal  interfaces;  Xen,  KVM,  and  VMWare  backends; 
Amazon  EBS-compatible  virtual  storage  devices;  interface  to  the  Amazon  EC2  public 
cloud; virtual networks.  
 
Nimbus3: The Nimbus toolkit is built on top of the Globus framework. Nimbus provides 
most features in common with other open-source VI managers, such as an EC2-compatible 
front-end  API,  support  to  Xen,  and  a  backend  interface  to  Amazon  EC2.  However,  it 
distinguishes  from  others  by  providing  a  Globus  Web  Services  Resource  Framework 
(WSRF) interface. It also provides a backend service, named Pilot, which spawns VMs on 
clusters managed by a local resource manager (LRM) such as PBS and SGE.  
Nimbus’ core was engineered around the Spring framework to be easily extensible, 
thus allowing several internal components to be replaced and also eases the integration with 
other systems.  
In summary, Nimbus provides the following features: Linux-based control- ler; EC2-
compatible (SOAP) and WSRF interfaces; Xen and KVM backend and a Pilot program to 
spawn VMs through an LRM; interface to the Amazon EC2 public cloud; virtual networks; 
one-click virtual clusters.  
 
OpenNebula: OpenNebula is one of the most feature-rich open-source VI managers. It was 
initially  conceived  to  manage  local  virtual  infrastructure,  but  has  also  included  remote 
interfaces that make it viable to build public clouds. Altogether, four programming APIs are 
available: XML-RPC and libvirt for local interaction; a subset of EC2 (Query) APIs and the 
OpenNebula Cloud API (OCA) for public access.  
OpenNebula provides the following features: Linux-based controller; CLI, XML-
RPC, EC2-compatible  Query  and OCA  interfaces; Xen, KVM, and VMware backend; 
interface to public clouds (Amazon EC2, ElasticHosts); virtual networks; dynamic resource 
allocation; advance reserva- tion of capacity.  
 
OpenPEX: OpenPEX (Open Provisioning and EXecution Environment) was constructed 
around the notion of using advance reservations as the primary method for allocating VM 
instances.  
OpenPEX provides  the following features: multi-platform (Java)  controller; Web 
portal and Web services (REST) interfaces; Citrix XenServer backend; advance reservation 
of capacity with negotiation.  
 
oVirt: oVirt is an open-source VI manager, sponsored by Red Hat’s Emergent Technology 
group. It provides most of the basic features of other VI managers.  
oVirt provides the following features: Fedora Linux-based controller packaged as a 
virtual appliance; Web portal interface; KVM backend.  
 
Platform  ISF:  Infrastructure  Sharing  Facility  (ISF)  is  the  VI  manager  offering  from 

 
  19 
Platform Computing. The company, mainly through its LSF family of products, has been 
serving the HPC market for several years.  
ISF provides the following features: Linux-based controller packaged as a virtual 
appliance;  Web  portal  interface;  dynamic  resource  allocation;  advance  reservation  of 
capacity; high availability.  
 
VMWare vSphere and vCloud: vSphere is VMware’s suite of tools aimed at transforming 
IT infrastructures into private clouds. In the vSphere architecture, servers run on the ESXi 
platform. A separate server runs vCenter Server, which centralizes control over the entire 
virtual  infrastructure.  Through  the  vSphere  Client  software,  administrators  connect  to 
vCenter Server to perform various tasks.  
The  Distributed  Resource  Scheduler  (DRS)  makes  allocation  decisions  based  on 
predefined rules and policies. It continuously monitors the amount   of resources available to 
VMs and, if necessary, makes allocation changes to meet VM requirements. In the storage 
virtualization realm, vStorage VMFS is a cluster file system to provide aggregate several 
disks in a single volume. VMFS is especially optimized to store VM images and virtual 
disks. It supports storage equipment that use Fibre Channel or iSCSI SAN.  
vSphere  provides  the  following  features:  Windows-based  controller  (vCenter 
Server); CLI, GUI, Web portal, and Web services interfaces; VMware ESX, ESXi backend; 
VMware  vStorage  VMFS  storage  virtualization;  interface  to  external  clouds  (VMware 
vCloud  partners);  virtual  networks  (VMWare  Distributed  Switch);  dynamic  resource 
allocation  (VMware  DRM);  high  availability;  data  protection  (VMWare  Consolidated 
Backup). 
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS 
Public  Infrastructure  as  a  Service  providers  commonly  offer  virtual  servers 
containing  one  or  more  CPUs,  running  several  choices  of  operating  systems  and  a 
customized software stack. In addition, storage space and communication facilities are often 
provided. 
Features 
IAAS offers a set of specialized features that can influence the cost benefit ratio to be 
experienced by user  applications  when  moved  to the cloud.  
The most relevant features are:  
1. Geographic distribution of data centers.  
2. Variety of user interfaces and APIs to access the system.  
3. Specialized components and services that aid Particular applications (e.g., 
load- balancers, firewalls). 
4. Choice of virtualization platform and operating systems and  
5. Different billing methods and period (e.g., prepaid vs. postpaid, hourly vs. 
monthly). 
 
Geographic  Presence—  To  improve  availability  and  responsiveness,  a  provider  of 
worldwide services would typically build several data centers distributed around the world. 
For example, Amazon Web Services presents the concept of availability zones and regions 

 
  20 
for  its  EC2  service.  Availability  zones  are  distinct  locations  that  are  engineered  to  be 
insulated from failures in other availability zones and provide inexpensive, low-latency 
network connectivity to other availability zones in the same region. Regions, in turn, are 
geographically dispersed and will be in separate geographic areas or countries. 
 
User Interfaces and Access to Servers— Ideally, a public IaaS provider must provide 
multiple access means to its cloud, thus catering for various users and their preferences. 
Different  types  of user interfaces  (UI) provide  different  levels  of abstraction,  the  most 
common being graphical user interfaces (GUI), command-line tools (CLI), and Web service 
(WS) APIs. 
  
GUIs are preferred by end users who need to launch, customize, and monitor a few virtual 
servers and do not necessarily need to repeat the process several times. On the other hand, 
CLIs offer more flexibility and the possibility of automating repetitive tasks via scripts 
(e.g., start and shutdown a number of virtual servers at regular intervals).  
 
Advance Reservation of Capacity— Advance reservations allow users to request for an 
IaaS provider to reserve resources for a specific time frame in the future, thus ensuring that 
cloud resources will be available at that time. However, most clouds only support best-
effort requests that means users can request server whenever resources are available .    
Amazon Reserved Instances is a form of advance reservation of capacity, allowing 
users to pay a fixed amount of money in advance to guarantee resource availability at 
anytime during an agreed period and then paying a discounted hourly rate when resources 
are in use. However, only long periods of 1 to 3 years are offered; therefore, users cannot 
express their reservations in finer granularities—for example, hours or days. 
Automatic Scaling and Load Balancing— Automatic scaling is a highly desirable feature 
of IaaS clouds. It allows users to set conditions for when they want their applications to 
scale up and down, based on application-specific metrics such as transactions per second, 
number of simultaneous users, request latency, and so forth. 
When the number of virtual servers is increased by automatic scaling, incoming traffic must 
be automatically distributed among the available servers. This activity enables applications 
to promptly respond to traffic increase while also achieving greater fault tolerance. 
Service-Level Agreement. Service-level agreements (SLAs) are offered by IaaS providers 
to express their commitment to delivery of a certain QoS. To customers it serves as a 
warranty. An SLA usually include availability and performance guarantees. Additionally, 
metrics  must  be  agreed  upon  by  all  parties  as  well  as  penalties  for  violating  these 
expectations. 
Most  IaaS  providers  focus  their  SLA  terms  on  availability  guarantees,  specifying  the 
minimum percentage of time the system will be available during  a  certain period.  For 
instance, Amazon EC2 states that “if the annual uptime Percentage for a customer drops 
below 99.95% for the service year, that customer is eligible to receive a service credit equal 
to 10% of their bill.3” 
Hypervisor  and  Operating  System  Choice—  Traditionally,  IaaS  offerings  have  been 
based  on  heavily  customized  open-source  Xen  deployments.  IaaS  providers  needed 
expertise in Linux, networking, virtualization, metering, resource management, and many 

 
  21 
other low-level aspects to successfully deploy and maintain their cloud offerings.  
More  recently,  there has  been  an  emergence  of  turnkey  IaaS  platforms  such  as 
VMWare VCloud and Citrix Cloud Center (C3) which have lowered the barrier of entry for 
IaaS competitors, leading to a rapid expansion in the IaaS marketplace. 
Case Studies 
Amazon Web Services: Amazon WS4 (AWS) is one of the major players in the cloud 
computing market. It pioneered the introduction of IaaS clouds in 2006. It offers a variety 
cloud  services,  most  notably:  S3  (storage),  EC2  (virtual  servers),  Cloudfront  (content 
delivery), Cloudfront Streaming (video streaming), Simple DB (structured datastore), RDS 
(Relational Database), SQS (reliable messaging), and Elastic MapReduce (data processing). 
The ElasticCompute Cloud (EC2) offers Xen-based virtual servers (instances) that can be 
instantiated from Amazon Machine Images (AMIs). Instances are available in a variety of 
sizes, operating systems, architectures, and price. CPU capacity of instances is measured in 
Amazon Compute Units and, although fixed for each instance, vary among instance types 
from 1 (small instance) to 20 (high CPU instance). Each instance provides a certain amount 
of  non  persistent  disk  space;  a  persistence  disk  service  (Elastic  Block  Storage)  allows 
attaching virtual disks to instances with space up to 1TB. Elasticity can be achieved by 
combining the Cloud Watch, Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing features, which 
allow  the  number  of  instances  to  scale  up  and  down  automatically  based  on  a  set  of 
customizable rules, and traffic to be distributed across available instances. Fixed IP address 
(Elastic IPs) are not available by default, but can be obtained at an additional cost. 
Flexiscale: Flexiscale is a UK-based provider offering services similar in nature to Amazon 
Web Services.  Flexiscale cloud  provides  the following  features:  available in  UK;  Web 
services  (SOAP),  Web-based  user  interfaces;  access  to  virtual  server  mainly  via  SSH 
(Linux) and Remote Desktop (Windows); 100% availability SLA with automatic recovery 
of  VMs  in  case  of  hardware  failure;  per  hour  pricing;  Linux  and  Windows  operating 
systems; automatic scaling (horizontal/vertical). 
Joyent:  Joyent’s  Public  Cloud  offers  servers  based  on  Solaris  containers  virtualization 
technology.  These  servers,  dubbed  accelerators,  allow  deploying  various  specialized 
software- stack based on a customized version of Open- Solaris operating system, which 
include by default a Web-based configuration tool and several pre-installed software, such 
as Apache, MySQL, PHP, Ruby on Rails, and Java. Software load balancing is available as 
an accelerator in addition to hardware load balancers. A notable feature of Joyent’s virtual 
servers is automatic vertical scaling of CPU cores, which means a virtual server can make 
use of additional CPUs automatically up to the maximum number of cores available in the 
physical host. 
The Joyent public cloud offers the following features: multiple geographic locations 
inthe United States; Web-based user interface; access to virtual server via SSH and Web-
based  administration  tool;  100%  availability  SLA;  per  month  pricing;  OS-level 
virtualization  Solaris  containers;  Open-  Solaris  operating  systems;  automatic 
scaling(vertical). 
GoGrid: GoGrid, like many other IaaS providers, allows its customers to utilize a range of 
pre- made Windows and Linux images, in a range of fixed instance sizes. GoGrid also 
offers “value- added” stacks on top for applications such as high- volume Web serving, e-

 
  22 
Commerce, and database stores. It offers some notable features, such as a “hybrid hosting” 
facility,  which  combines  traditional  dedicated  hosts  with  auto-scaling  cloud  server 
infrastructure. As part of its core IaaS offerings, GoGrid also provides free hardware load 
balancing, auto-scaling capabilities, and persistent storage, features that typically add an 
additional cost for most other IaaS providers. 
Rackspace Cloud Servers: Rackspace Cloud Servers is an IaaS solution that provides 
fixed size instances in the cloud. Cloud Servers offers a range of Linux- based pre-made 
images. A user can request different-sized images, where the size is measured by requested 
RAM, not CPU. 
PLATFORM AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS 
Public Platform as a Service providers commonly offer a development and deployment 
environment that allow users to create and run their applications with little or no concern to 
low-  level  details  of  the  platform.  In  addition,  specific  programming  languages  and 
frameworks are made available in the platform, as well as other services such as persistent 
data storage and in memory caches. 
Features 
Programming  Models,  Languages,  and  Frameworks:  Programming  models  made 
available by IaaS providers define how users can express their applications using higher 
levels of abstraction and efficiently run them on the cloud platform. 
Each model aims at efficiently solving a particular problem. In the cloud computing 
domain, the most common activities that require specialized models are: processing of large 
dataset in clusters of computers (MapReduce model), development of request-based Web 
services and applications; definition and orchestration of business processes in the form of 
workflows  (Workflow  model);  and  high-performance  distributed  execution  of  various 
computational tasks. 
For  user  convenience,  PaaS  providers  usually  support  multiple  programming 
languages. Most commonly used languages in platforms include Python and Java (e.g., 
Google AppEngine), .NET languages (e.g., Microsoft Azure), and Ruby (e.g., Heroku). 
Force.com has devised its own programming language (Apex) and an Excel-like query 
language, which provide higher levels of abstraction to key platform functionalities. 
A variety of software frameworks are usually made available to PaaS developers, 
depending on application focus. Providers that focus on Web and enterprise application 
hosting offer popular frameworks such as Ruby on Rails, Spring, Java EE, and .NET. 
Persistence Options: A persistence layer is essential to allow applications to record their 
state and recover it in case of crashes, as well as to store user data. Web and enterprise 
application  developers  have  chosen  relational  databases  as  the  preferred  persistence 
method.  These  databases  offer  fast  and  reliable  structured  data  storage  and  transaction 
processing,  but  may  lack  scalability  to  handle  several  peta  bytes  of  data  stored  in 
commodity computers. In the cloud computing domain, distributed storage technologies 
have emerged, which seek to be robust and highly scalable, at the expense of relational 
structure and convenient query languages. 
  

 
  23 
CASE STUDIES 
Aneka: Aneka is a .NET-based service-oriented resource management and development 
platform. Each server in an Aneka deployment (dubbed Aneka cloud node) hosts the Aneka 
container, which provides the base infrastructure that consists of services for persistence, 
security (authorization, authentication and auditing), and communication (message handling 
and dispatching). Cloud nodes can be either physical server, virtual machines (Xen Server 
and VMware are supported), and instances rented from Amazon EC2. The Aneka container 
can also host any number of optional services that can be added by developers to augment 
the capabilities of an Aneka Cloud node, thus providing a single, extensible framework for 
orchestrating various application models. 
Several programming models are supported by such task models to enable execution 
of legacy HPC applications and Map Reduce, which enables a variety of data-mining and 
search applications. Users request resources via a client to a reservation services manager of 
the Aneka master node, which manages all cloud nodes and contains scheduling service to 
distribute request to cloud nodes. 
App Engine: Google App Engine lets you run your Python and Java Web applications on 
elastic infrastructure supplied by Google. App Engine allows your applications to scale 
dynamically as your traffic and data storage requirements increase or decrease. It gives 
developers a choice between a Python stack and Java. The App Engine serving architecture 
is notable in that it allows real-time auto- scaling without virtualization for many common 
types of Web applications. However, such auto-scaling is dependent on the application 
developer using a limited subset of the native APIs on each platform, and in some instances 
you need to use specific Google APIs such as URLFetch, Data store, and mem cache in 
place of certain native API calls. For example, a deployed App Engine application cannot 
write to the file system directly (you must use the Google Data store) or open a socket or 
access another host directly (you must use Google URL fetch service). A Java application 
cannot create a new Thread either. 
Microsoft Azure: Microsoft Azure Cloud Services offers developers a hosted. NET Stack 
(C#,  VB.Net,  ASP.NET).  In  addition,  a  Java  &  Ruby  SDK  for  .NET  Services  is  also 
available. The Azure system consists of a number of elements. The Windows Azure Fabric 
Controller provides auto-scaling and reliability, and it manages memory resources and load 
balancing. The .NET Service Bus registers and connects applications together. The .NET 
Access  Control  identity  providers  include  enterprise  directories  and  Windows  LiveID. 
Finally, the .NET Workflow allows construction and execution of workflow instances. 
Force.com: In conjunction with the Salesforce.com service, the Force.com PaaS allows 
developers to create add-on functionality that integrates into main Salesforce CRM SaaS 
application. Force.com offers developers two approaches to create applications that can be 
deployed  on  its  SaaS  plaform:  a  hosted  Apex  or  Visualforce  application.  Apex  is  a 
proprietary Java-like language that can be used to create Salesforce applications. Visual 
force is an XML-like syntax for building UIs in HTML, AJAX, or Flex to overlay over the 
Salesforce hosted CRM system. An application store called App Exchange is also provided, 
which offers a paid & free application directory. 
Heroku: Heroku is a platform for instant deployment of Ruby on Rails Web applications. 
In the Heroku system, servers are invisibly managed by the platform and are never exposed 
to users. Applications are automatically dispersed across different CPU cores and servers, 

 
  24 
maximizing performance and minimizing contention. Heroku has an advanced logic layer 
than can automatically route around failures, ensuring seamless and uninterrupted service at 
all times. 
 
CHALLENGES AND RISKS 
 Despite the initial success and popularity of the cloud computing paradigm and 
the extensive availability of providers and tools, a significant number of challenges and 
risks are inherent to this new model of computing. Providers, developers, and end users 
must consider these challenges and risks to take good advantage of cloud computing. Issues 
to be faced include user privacy, data security, data lock-in, availability of service, disaster 
recovery, performance, scalability, energy- efficiency, and programmability. 
Security,  Privacy,  and  Trust:  Security  and  privacy  affect  the  entire  cloud computing 
stack, since there is a massive use of third-party services and infrastructures that are used to 
host  important  data or  to  perform  critical  operations.  In  this  scenario,  the  trust  toward 
providers is fundamental to ensure the desired level of privacy for applications hosted in the 
cloud. Legal and regulatory issues also need attention. When data are moved into the Cloud, 
providers may choose to locate them anywhere on the planet. The physical location of data 
centers determines the set of laws that can be applied to the management of data. For 
example, specific cryptography techniques could not be used because they are not allowed 
in some countries. Similarly, country laws can impose that sensitive data, such as patient 
health records, are to be stored within national borders. 
Data Lock-In and Standardization: A major concern of cloud computing users is about 
having  their  data  locked-in  by  a  certain  provider.  Users  may  want  to  move  data  and 
applications out from a provider that does not meet their requirements. However, in their 
current  form,  cloud  computing  infrastructures  and  platforms  do  not  employ  standard 
methods of storing user data and applications. Consequently, they do not interoperate and 
user data are not portable.  
The answer to this concern is standardization. In this direction, there are efforts to 
create open standards for cloud computing. The Cloud Computing Interoperability Forum 
(CCIF) was formed by organizations such as Intel, Sun, and Cisco in order to “enable a 
global  cloud  computing  ecosystem  whereby  organizations  are  able  to  seamlessly  work 
together for the purposes for wider industry adoption of cloud computing technology.” The 
development of the Unified Cloud Interface (UCI) by CCIF aims at creating a standard 
programmatic  point  of  access  to  an  entire  cloud  infrastructure.  In  the  hardware 
virtualization  sphere,  the  Open  Virtual  Format  (OVF)  aims  at  facilitating  packing  and 
distribution of software to be run on VMs so that virtual appliances can be made portable—
that is, seamlessly run on hypervisor of different vendors. 
Availability, Fault-Tolerance, and Disaster Recovery: It is expected that users will have 
certain  expectations  about  the  service  level  to  be  provided  once  their  applications  are 
moved  to  the  cloud.  These  expectations  include  availability  of  the  service,  its  overall 
performance, and what measures are to be taken when something goes wrong in the system 
or its components. In summary, users seek for a warranty before they can comfortably 
move their business to the cloud. SLAs, which include QoS requirements, must be ideally 
set  up between  customers and  cloud computing providers  to  act  as warranty. An  SLA 
specifies the details of the service to be provided, including availability and performance 

 
  25 
guarantees. 
Additionally, metrics must be agreed upon by all parties, and penalties for violating 
the expectations must also be approved. 
Resource  Management  and  Energy-Efficiency:  One  important  challenge  faced  by 
providers of cloud computing services is the efficient management of virtualized resource 
pools. Physical resources such as CPU cores, disk space, and network bandwidth must be 
sliced and shared among virtual machines running potentially heterogeneous workloads. 
The multi-dimensional nature of virtual machines complicates the activity of finding a good 
mapping of VMs onto available physical hosts while maximizing user utility. Dimensions 
to be considered include: number of CPUs, amount of memory, size of virtual disks, and 
network bandwidth. Dynamic VM mapping policies may leverage the ability to suspend, 
migrate, and resume VMs as an easy way of preempting low-priority allocations in favor of 
higher-priority ones. Migration of VMs also brings additional challenges such as detecting 
when to initiate a migration, which VM to migrate, and where to migrate. In addition, 
policies may take advantage of live migration of virtual machines to relocate data center 
load without significantly disrupting running services. In this case, an additional concern is 
the  trade-off  between  the negative  impact of  a  live  migration  on  the  performance  and 
stability of a service and the benefits to be achieved with that migration. Another challenge 
concerns  the  outstanding  amount  of  data  to  be  managed  in  various  VM  management 
activities. Such data amount is a result of particular abilities of virtual machines, including 
the ability of traveling through space (i.e., migration) and time (i.e., check pointing and 
rewinding),  operations  that  may  be  required  in  load  balancing,  backup,  and  recovery 
scenarios. In addition, dynamic provisioning of new VMs and replicating existing VMs 
require efficient mechanisms to make VM block storage devices (e.g., image files) quickly 
available at selected hosts. Data centers consumer large amounts of electricity. According 
to a data published by HP, 100 server racks can consume 1.3MWof power and another 1.3 
MW are required by the cooling system, thus costing USD 2.6 million per year. Besides the 
monetary cost, data centers significantly impact the environment in terms of CO2 emissions 
from the cooling systems. 
COMPUTING PARADIGMS: 
High-Performance Computing: 
For many years, HPC systems emphasize the raw speed performance. The speed of 
HPC systems has increased from Gflops in the early 1990s to now Pflops in 2010. This 
improvement  was  driven  mainly  by  the  demands  from  scientific,  engineering,  and 
manufacturing communities. 
Top 500 most powerful computer systems in the world are measured by floating-
point speed in Linpack benchmark results. However, the number of supercomputer users  is 
limited to less than 10% of all computer users.  
Today, the majority of computer users are using desktop computers or large servers 
when they conduct Internet searches and market-driven computing tasks. 
Three New Computing Paradigms 
 With the introduction of SOA, Web 2.0 services become available. 

 
  26 
 Advances in virtualization make it possible to see the growth of Internet clouds as a 
new computing paradigm. 
 The maturity of  radio-frequency identification (RFID),  Global  Positioning  System 
(GPS), and sensor  technologies has  triggered the development  of  the Internet of 
Things (IoT). 
Computing Paradigm Distinctions 
 Centralized computing 
 Parallel computing 
 Distributed computing 
 Cluster omputing 
 Cloud computing 
 Grid computing 
 
Centralized computing: 
     This is a computing paradigm by which all computer resources are centralized in 
one physical system.  
 All resources (processors, memory, and storage) are fully shared and tightly coupled 
within one integrated OS.Many data centers and supercomputers are centralized systems, 
but they are used in parallel, distributed, and cloud computing applications 
Parallel Computing: 
Parallel  computing  is  defined  as  a  type  of  computing  where  multiple  computer 
systems are used simultaneously. Here a problem is broken into sub-problems and then 
further  broken  down  into  instructions.  These  instructions  from  each  sub-problem  are 
executed concurrently on different processors. 
Here in the below diagram, you can see how the parallel computing system consists 
of multiple processors that communicate with each other and perform multiple tasks over a 
shared memory simultaneously. 
 
 
Distributed Computing: 

 
  27 
Distributed computing is defined as a type of computing where multiple computer  
systems work on a single problem. Here all the computer systems are linked together, and 
the problem is divided into sub-problems where each part is solved by different computer 
systems. The goal of distributed computing is to increase the performance and efficiency 
of the system and ensure fault tolerance. In the below diagram, each processor has its own 
local memory, and all the processors communicate with each other over a network.  
 
 
 
Cluster Computing:  
A cluster is a group of independent computers that work together to perform the 
tasks given. Cluster computing is defined as a type of computing that consists of two or 
more independent computers, referred to as nodes, that work together to execute tasks as a 
single machine. 
The goal of cluster computing is to increase the performance, scalability and simplicity of 
the system. As you can see in the below diagram, all the nodes, (irrespective of whether 
they are a parent node or child node), act as a single entity to perform the tasks. 
 
 
 
 
Cloud computing : 
     An Internet cloud of resources can be either a centralized or a distributed computing 
system. The cloud applies parallel or distributed computing, or both. Clouds can be built with 
physical or virtualized resources over large data centers that are centralized or distributed 
 

 
  28 
 
Grid Computing: 
Grid computing is defined as a type of computing where it is constitutes a network 
of computers that work together to perform tasks that may be difficult for a single machine 
to handle. All the computers on that network work under the same umbrella and are termed 
as a virtual supercomputer. 
The tasks they work on is of either high computing power and consist of large data 
sets. All communication between the computer systems in grid computing is done on the 
“data grid”.The goal of grid computing is to solve more high computational problems in 
less time and improve productivity.  
 
 
 
 

 
  29 
UNIT - 2 
MIGRATING INTO A CLOUD: INTRODUCTION 
 
Cloud  computing  has  been  a  hotly  debated  and  discussed  topic  amongst  IT 
professionals and researchers both in the industry and in academia. There are intense 
discussions on several blogs, in Web sites, and in several research efforts.  This  also 
resulted in several entrepreneurial efforts to help leverage and migrate into the cloud 
given the myriad issues, challenges, benefits, and limitations and lack of comprehensive 
understanding of what cloud computing can do. 
 
On the one hand, there were these large cloud computing IT vendors like Google, 
Amazon, and Microsoft, who had started offering cloud computing services on what 
seemed like a demonstration and trial basis though not explicitly mentioned. They were 
charging users fees that in certain contexts demonstrated very attractive pricing models. 
Most enterprises today are powered by captive data centers. In most large or small 
enterprises  today,  IT  is  the  backbone  of  their  operations.  Invariably  for  these  large 
enterprises, their data centers are distributed across various geographies. 
 
They comprise systems and software that span several generations of products 
sold by a variety of IT vendors. In order to meet varying loads, most of these data centers 
are provisioned with capacity beyond the peak loads experienced. 
Many data center management teams have been continuously innovating their 
management practices and technologies.  
 
Cloud  computing  turned  attractive  to  them  because  they  could  pass  on  the 
additional demand from their IT setups onto the cloud while paying only for the usage 
and being unencumbered by the load of operations and management.
 
The Promise of the Cloud
 
1. The promise of the cloud both on the business front (the attractive cloudonomics) 
and the technology front widely aided the CxOs to spawn out several non-mission 
critical IT needs from the ambit of their captive traditional data centers to the 
appropriate cloud service.  
2. Invariably, these IT needs had some common features: They were typically Web-
oriented; they represented seasonal IT demands; they were amenable to parallel 
batch processing; they were non-mission critical and therefore did not have high 
security demands. They included scientific applications too [7]. Several small and 
medium  business  enterprises,  however,  leveraged  the  cloud  much  beyond  the 
cautious user.  
3. 
Many startups opened their IT departments exclusively using cloud services—
very successfully and with high ROI. Having observed these successes, several 
large enterprises have started successfully running pilots for leveraging the cloud. 
 
4. 
Many  large  enterprises  run  SAP  to  manage  their  operations.  SAP  itself  is 
experimenting with running its suite of products:   SAP Business One as well as 

 
  30 
SAP NetWeaver on Amazon cloud offerings. 
 
5. 
Gartner, Forrester, and other industry research analysts predict that a substantially 
significant percentage of the top enterprises in the world would have migrated 
most of their IT needs to the cloud offerings by 2012, thereby demonstrating the 
widespread impact and benefits from cloud computing. Indeed, the promise of the 
cloud has been significant in its impact.
 
 
 
The promise of the cloud computing services. 
BROAD APPROACHES TO MIGRATING INTO THE CLOUD 
 
Why Migrate:  
 
There are economic and business reasons why an enterprise application can be 
migrated into the cloud, and there are also several number of technological reasons.  
Many of these efforts come up as initiatives in adoption of cloud technologies in 
the enterprise, resulting in integration of enterprise applications running off the captive 
data centers with the new ones that have been developed on the cloud. 
At the core, migration of an application into the cloud can happen in one of 
several ways:  
1. Either the application is clean and independent. 
2. Perhaps some degree of code needs to be modified and adapted or the design (and 
therefore the code) needs to be first migrated into the cloud computing service 
environment  
3. 
Perhaps the migration results in the core architecture being migrated for a cloud 
computing service setting, this resulting in a new architecture being developed, 
along with the accompanying design and code implementation. 
 
4. 
Perhaps while the application is migrated as is, it is the usage of the application 
that needs to be migrated and therefore adapted and modified. 
 
5. Migration can happen at five levels i.e., 
1.  Application 
2. Code 
3. Design 
4. Architecture 
5. Usage 
 
 
Cloudonomics
 
‘Pay per use’ – Lower Cost Barriers
 
On Demand Resources –Autoscaling
 
Capex vs OPEX – No capital expenses (CAPEX) and only operational expenses OPEX.
 
SLA driven operations – Much Lower TCO
 
Attractive NFR support: Availability, Reliability
 
Technology
 
‘Infinite’ Elastic availability – Compute/Storage/Bandwidth
 
Automatic Usage Monitoring and Metering
 
Jobs/ Tasks Virtualized and Transparently ‘Movable’
 
Integration and interoperability ‘support’ for hybrid ops
 
Transparently encapsulated & abstracted IT features.
 

 
  31 
With due simplification, the migration of an enterprise application is best captured by 
the following:
 
 
1. 
Where
 
P
 
is
 
the
 
application
 
before
 
migration
 
running
 
in
 
captive
 
data
 
center.
 
2. 
P
C
0
   
is the
 
application
 
part
 
after
 
migration
 
into
 
a
 
(hybrid)
 
cloud.
 
3. 
P
l
0
  
is
 
the
 
part of
  
application
  
being
  
run
  
in
  
the
  
captive
  
local
  
data
  
center.
 
4. 
P
0
OFC
   
is
 the
 application part optimized for cloud.
 
Seven-Step Model of Migration into a Cloud  
Step-1: Cloud migration assessments comprise assessments to understand the issues involved 
in  the  specific  case  of  migration  at  the  application  level  or  the  code,  the  design,  the 
architecture, or usage levels. These assessments are about the cost of migration as well as 
about the ROI that can be achieved in the case of production version. 
Step-2: Isolating all systemic and environmental dependencies of the enterprise application 
components within the captive data center. 
Step-3: Generating the mapping constructs between what shall possibly remain in the local 
captive data center and what goes onto the cloud.  
Step-4: substantial part of the enterprise application needs to be rearchitected, redesigned, and 
reimplemented on the cloud 
Step-5: We leverage the intrinsic features of the cloud computing service to augment our 
enterprise application in its own small ways. 
Step-6: We validate and test the new form of the enterprise application with an extensive test 
suite that comprises testing the components of the enterprise application on the cloud as well  
Step-7: Test results could be positive or mixed. In the latter case, we iterate and optimize as 
appropriate. After several such optimizing iterations, the migration is deemed successful 

 
  32 
                                                        
 
Enriching the ‘Integration as a Service’ Paradigm for the Cloud Era 
 
1. The trend-setting cloud paradigm represents the cool conglomeration of a number of 
proven and promising Web and enterprise technologies. Though the cloud idea is not 
conceptually new, practically it has brought in myriad tectonic shifts for the whole 
information and communication technology (ICT) industry.  
 
2. The cloud concepts have progressively and perceptibly impacted the IT and business 
domains on several critical aspects. The cloud computing has brought in series of 
novelty-packed deployment, delivery, consumption and pricing models whereas the 
service orientation prescribes as much simpler application design mechanism.  
 
3. The noteworthy contribution of the much-discoursed and deliberated cloud computing 
is the faster realization and proliferation of dynamic, converged, adaptive, on-demand, 
and online compute infrastructures, which are the key requirement for the future IT. 
 
4. The delightful distinctions here are that clouds guarantee most of the nonfunction 
requirements  (Quality  of  Service  (QoS)  attributes)  such  as  availability,  high 
performance, on-demand scalability/elasticity, affordability, global-scale accessibility 
and usability, energy efficiency etc.  
 
 
5. Having understood the exceptional properties of cloud infrastructures (hereafter will 
be described as just clouds), most of the global enterprises (small, medium and even 
large)  are  steadily  moving  their  IT  offerings  such  as  business  services  and 
applications to clouds. This transition will facilitate a higher and deeper reach and 
richness in application delivery and consumability.  
 
6. Product vendors having found that the cloud style is a unique proposition are moving 
their platforms, databases, and middleware to clouds. Cloud Infrastructure providers 
START
 
Assess
 
Optimize
 
Isolate
 
END
 
The Iterative Seven Step 
Migration Model
 
Test
 
Map
 
Augment
 
Re- 
architect
 

 
  33 
are  establishing  cloud  centers  to  host  a  variety  of  ICT  services  and platforms  of 
worldwide individuals, innovators, and institutions.  
7. Cloud service providers (CSPs) are very aggressive in experimenting and embracing 
the cool cloud ideas and today every business and technical services are being hosted 
in clouds to be delivered to global customers, clients and consumers over the Internet 
communication infrastructure.  
 
INTEGRATION AS A SERVICE (IAAS): 
Why Integration? 
 Increasingly business applications are deployed in clouds to reap the business and 
technical benefits. 
 On the other hand, there are still innumerable applications and data sources locally 
stationed and sustained primarily due to the security reason. 
 The question here is how to create a seamless connectivity between those hosted and 
on-premise applications to empower them to work together. 
 
How Integration is done? 
 Integration as a service (IaaS) is the budding and distinctive capability of clouds in 
fulfilling the business integration requirements. 
 IaaS overcomes these challenges by smartly utilizing the time-tested business- to- 
business  (B2B)  integration  technology  as  the  value  added  bridge  between  SaaS 
solutions and in-house business applications. 
 
SaaS INTEGRATION 
 Cloud-centric  integration  solutions  are  being  developed  and  demonstrated  for 
showcasing their capabilities for integrating enterprise and cloud applications. 
 Now with the arrival and adoption of the transformative and disruptive paradigm of 
cloud computing, every ICT products are being converted into a collection of services 
to be delivered via the open Internet 
 In  that  line,  the  standards-compliant  integration  suites  are  being  transitioned  into 
services so that any integration need of any one from any part of the world, can be 
easily, cheaply and rapidly met. 
 
Integration as a Service (IaaS):  
Migration  of the functionality  of a  typical  enterprise  application  integration  (EAI)  hub / 
enterprise service bus (ESB) into the cloud for providing for smooth data transport between 
any enterprise and SaaS applications. 
 Users subscribe to IaaS as they would do for any other SaaS application. 
 Cloud middleware will be made available as a service. 
 
 For service integration, it is enterprise service bus (ESB) and for data integration, it is 
enterprise data bus (EDB). 
 There are Message oriented middleware (MOM) and message brokers for integrating 
decoupled applications through message passing and pickup. 
 Events are coming up fast and there are complex event processing (CEP) engines that 
receive a stream of diverse events from diverse sources, process them at real- time to 

 
  34 
extract and figure out the encapsulated knowledge, and accordingly select and activate 
one or more target applications. 
 Cloud infrastructure is not very useful without SaaS applications that run on top of 
them,  and  SaaS  applications  are  not  very  valuable  without  access  to  the  critical 
corporate data that is typically locked away in various corporate systems. 
 Cloud applications to offer maximum value to their users, they need to provide a 
simple mechanism to import or load external data, export or replicate their data for 
reporting  or  analysis  purposes,  and  finally  keep  their  data  synchronized  with  on-
premise applications. 
 
Why SaaS Integration is hard? Reasons: 
 Limited Access: Access to cloud resources (SaaS, PaaS, and the infrastructures) is 
more limited than local applications. Once applications move to the cloud, custom 
applications  must  be  designed  to  support  integration  because  there  is  no  longer 
thatlow level of access. Enterprises putting their applications in the cloud or those 
subscribers of cloud-based business services are dependent on the vendor to provide 
the integration hooks and APIs. 
 
 Dynamic Resources: Cloud resources are virtualized and service-oriented. That is, 
everything  is  expressed  and  exposed  as  a  service.  Due  to  the  dynamism  factor 
infrastructural changes are liable for dynamic changes. These would clearly impact 
the integration model. 
 
 Performance:  Clouds  support  application  scalability  and  resource  elasticity. 
However the network distances between elements in the cloud are no longer under our 
control. Because of the round trip latency, the cloud integration performance is bound 
to slow down 
 
NEW INTEGRATION SCENARIOS 
 
Three major integration scenarios 
 
Within a Public Cloud: Two different applications are hosted in a cloud. The role of the 
cloud  integration  middleware  (say  cloud-based  ESB  or  internet  service  bus  (ISB))  is  to 
seamlessly enable these applications to talk to each other. These applications can be owned 
by two different companies. They may live in a single physical server but run on different 
virtual machines. 
 
                                           
 
Homogeneous Clouds: The applications to be integrated are positioned in two geographically 

 
  35 
separated cloud infrastructures. The integration middleware can be in cloud 1 or 2 or in a 
separate cloud. There is a need for data and protocol transformation and they get done by the 
ISB 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Heterogeneous Clouds : One application is in public cloud and the other application is in 
private cloud 
 
 
 
The Integration Methodologies 
There are three types for cloud integration 
 Traditional  Enterprise  Integration  Tools  can  be  empowered  with  special 
connectors  to  access  Cloud-located  Applications:  With  a  persistent  rise  in  the 
necessity  towards  accessing  and  integrating  cloud  applications,  special  drivers, 
connectors and adapters are being built and incorporated on the existing integration 
platforms to enable bidirectional connectivity with the participating cloud services. 
 Traditional Enterprise Integration Tools are hosted in the Cloud: This approach 
is similar to the first option except that the integration softwaresuite is now hosted in 
any  third-party  cloud  infrastructures  so  that  the  enterprise  does  not  worry  about 
procuring and managing the hardware or installing the integration software 
 
 Integration-as-a-Service (IaaS) or On-Demand Integration Offerings: These are 
SaaS applications that are designed to deliver the integration service securely over the 
Internet and are able to integrate cloud applications with the on-premise systems, 
cloud-to-cloud applications. 
 

 
  36 
Characteristics of Integration Solutions and Products 
 Connectivity refers to the ability of the integration engine to engage with both the 
source and target systems using available native interfaces 
 Semantic  Mediation  refers  to  the  ability  to  account  for  the  differences  between 
application  semantics  between  two  or  more  systems.  Semantics  means  how 
information gets understood, interpreted and represented within information systems 
 Data Mediation converts data from a source data format into destination data format. 
Coupled  with  semantic  mediation,  data  mediation  or  data  transformation  is  the 
process of converting data from one native format on the source system, to another 
data format for the target system 
 Data Migration is the process of transferring data between storage types, formats, or 
systems. Data migration means that the data in the old system is mapped to the new 
systems 
 Data Security means the ability to insure that information extracted from the source 
systems has to securely be placed into target systems 
 Data  Integrity  means  data  is  complete  and  consistent.  Thus,  integrity  has  to  be 
guaranteed when data is getting mapped and maintained during integration operations, 
such as data synchronization between on-premise and SaaS- 
 Based systems. 
 Governance  refers  to  the  processes  and  technologies  that  surround  a  system  or 
systems, which control how those systems are accessed and leveraged 
 
Products And Platforms 
 Jitter  bit  is  a  fully  graphical  integration  solution  that  provides  users  a  versatile 
platform and a suite of productivity tools to reduce the Integration efforts sharply. 
 It can be used standalone or with existing EAI infrastructures, enabling users to create 
new  projects  or  consume  and  modify  existing  ones  offered  by  the  open  source 
community or service provider. 
 The Jitter bit solution enables the cool integration among confidential and corporate 
data, enterprise applications, web services, XML data sources, legacy systems, simple 
and complex flat files. 
 
Jitter bit is comprised of two major components: 
 
 Jitter bit Integration Environment: An intuitive point-and-click graphical UI that 
enables  to quickly configure,  test,  deploy and  manage integration  projects  on  the 
Jitterbit server. 
 Jitterbit Integration Server: A powerful and scalable run-time engine that processes 
all the integration operations, fully configurable and manageable from the Jitterbit 
application. 
 Boomi Software: BoomiAtomSphere is an integration service that is completely on- 
demand  and  connects  any  combination  of  SaaS,  PaaS,  cloud,  and  on-premise 
applications without the burden of installing and maintaining software packages or 
appliances.  Anyone  can  securely  build,  deploy  and  manage  simple  to  complex 
integration processes using only web browser. 
 Bungee  Connect:  Bungee  Connect  enables  cloud  computing  by  offering  an 
application  development  and  deployment  platform  that  enables  highly  interactive 

 
  37 
applications integrating multiple data sources and facilitating instant deployment.  
◦ Builts pecifically for cloud development, Bungee Connect reduces the efforts to 
integrate (mashup) multiple web services into a single application. 
 OpSource Connect: Expands on the OpSource Services Bus (OSB) by providing the 
infrastructure for two-way web services interactions, allowing customers to consume 
and publish applications across a common web services infrastructure. 
 SnapLogic:  SnapLogic  is  a  capable,  clean,  and  uncluttered  solution  for  data 
integration that can be deployed in enterprise as well as in cloud landscapes. The free 
community edition can be used for the most common point-to-point data integration 
tasks 
 
 
The  Pervasive  DataCloud:  Pervasive  Data  Cloud  is  the  first  multi-tenant  platform  for 
delivering the following 
 
 Integration as a Service (IaaS) for both hosted and on-premises applications and data 
sources 
 Packaged turnkey integration 
 Integration that supports every integration scenario 
 Connectivity to hundreds of different applications and data sources 
 
Other Products 
 Bluewolf 
 Online MQ 
 CloudMQ 
 Linxter 
 
ADVANTAGES OF CLOUD INTEGRATION: Cloud integration offers the following 
advantages over older, compartmentalized organizational methods: 
1. Each user can access personal data in real time from any device and from any location 
with Internet access. 
2. Each user can integrate personal data such as calendars and contact lists served by 
diverse application programs. 
3. Each user can employ the same logon information (username and password) for all 
personal applications. 
4. The system efficiently passes control messages among application programs. 
5. By avoiding the use of data silos, data integrity is maintained. 
6. Cloud integration offers scalability to allow for future expansion in terms of the 
number of users, the number of applications, or both. 
THE ONSET OF KNOWLEDGE ERA 
 
1. Path-breaking and people-centric technologies (miniaturization, virtualization, 
federation,  composition,  collaboration,  etc.)  are  emerging  and  are  being 

 
  38 
experimented, expounded, and established in order to empower the professional 
and the personal IT to be smart, simple, supple and sensitive towards users’ 
situational  needs  and  to  significantly  enhance  peoples’  comfort,  care, 
convenience and choice.  
2. In the monolithic mainframe era, one centralized and large system performed 
millions of operations to respond to thousands of users (one-to-many). 
3. Today everyone has his own compute machine (one-to-one), and tomorrow a 
multitude of smart objects and electronic devices (nomadic, wearable, portable, 
implantable  etc.)  will  seamlessly  and  spontaneously  co-  exist,  corroborate, 
correlate,  and  coordinate  with  one  another  dynamically  with  dexterity  to 
understand one or more users’ needs, conceive, construct, and deliver them at 
right time at right place (many-to-one). Anytime anywhere computing tends 
towards everywhere, every time and everything computing. 
4. 
Ambient  intelligence  (AmI)  is  the  newest  buzzword  today  with  ambient 
sensing, networking, perception, decision-making and actuation technologies. 
Multimedia and multimodal technologies are flourishing in order to be make 
human interaction more friendly and fruitful. 
 
5. 
Dynamic virtualized and autonomic infrastructures, flexible, integrated and lean 
processes,  constructive  and  contributive  building-blocks  (service,  model, 
composite, agent,  aspect etc.),  slim  and  sleek  devices  and  appliances,  smart 
objects empowered by invisible tags and stickers, natural interfaces, ad-hoc and 
situational  networking  capabilities  all  combine  adaptively  together  to 
accomplish the grandiose goals of the forthcoming ambient intelligence days 
and decades. In short, IT- sponsored and splurged smartness in every facet of 
our living in this world is the vision. Software engineering is on the right track 
with  the  maturity  of  service  orientation  concepts  and  software  as  a  service 
(SaaS) model. 
 
6. 
Clouds  chip  in  mightily  in  realizing  the  much-acclaimed  knowledge  era. 
Technologies  form  a  dynamic  cluster  in  real-time  in  order  to  contribute 
immensely  and  immeasurably  for  all  the  existing,  evolving  and  exotic 
expectations of people.
 
THE EVOLUTION OF SaaS 
1. SaaS paradigm is on fast track due to its innate powers and potentials. Executives, 
entrepreneurs, and end-users are ecstatic about the tactic as well  as strategic success 
of the emerging and evolving SaaS paradigm.  
2. A number of positive and progressive developments started to grip this model. Newer 
resources and activities are being consistently readied to be delivered as a service.  
3. Experts and evangelists are in unison that cloud is to rock the total IT community as 
the  best  possible  infrastructural  solution  for  effective  service  delivery.  There  are 
several  ways  clouds  can  be  leveraged  inspiringly  and  incredibly  for  diverse  IT 

 
  39 
problems. Today there is a small list of services being delivered via the clouds and in 
future, many more critical applications will be deployed and consumed. 
4. In short, clouds are set to decimate all kinds of IT inflexibility and dawn a growing 
array of innovations to prepare the present day IT for sustainable prosperity. 
5. IT  as  a  Service  (ITaaS)  is  the  most  recent  and  efficient  delivery  method  in  the 
decisive  IT  landscape.  With  the  meteoric  and  mesmerizing  rise  of  the  service 
orientation principles, every single IT resource, activity and infrastructure is being 
viewed and visualized as a service that sets the tone for the grand unfolding of the 
dreamt service era.  
6. These  days,  systems  are  designed  and  engineered  as  elegant  collections  of 
enterprising and evolving services. Infra- structures are service enabled to be actively 
participative and collaborative.  
7. In the same tenor, the much-maligned delivery aspect too has gone through several 
transformations and today the whole world has solidly settled for the green paradigm 
‘IT as a service (ITaaS)’.  
8. This  is  accentuated  due  to  the  pervasive  Internet.  Also,  we  are  bombarded  with 
innumerable implementation technologies and methodologies. Clouds, as indicated 
above, is the most visible and viable infrastructure for realizing ITaaS.  
9. Another influential and impressive factor is the maturity obtained in the consumption-
based  metering  and  billing  capability.  HP  even  proclaims  this  evolving  trend  as 
‘everything as a service’. 
10. Integration as a service (IaaS) is the budding and distinctive capability of clouds in 
fulfilling the business integration requirements. Increasingly business applications are 
deployed in clouds to reap the business and technical benefits. On the other hand, 
there  are  still  innumerable  applications  and  data  sources  locally  stationed  and 
sustained primarily due to the security reason. The question here is how to create a 
seamless connectivity between those hosted and on-premises applications to empower 
them to work together.  
11. IaaS over- comes these challenges by smartly utilizing the time-tested business-to-

 
  40 
business  (B2B)  integration  technology  as  the  value-added  bridge  between  SaaS 
solutions and in-house business applications. 
12. B2B systems are capable of driving this new on-demand integration model because 
they  are  traditionally  employed  to  automate  business  processes  between 
manufacturers  and  their  trading  partners.  That  means  they  provide  application-to-
application connectivity along with the functionality that is very crucial for linking 
internal  and  external  software  securely.  Unlike  the  conventional  EAI  solutions 
designed only for internal data sharing, B2B platforms have the ability to encrypt files 
for safe passage across the public network, manage large data volumes, transfer batch 
files,  convert  disparate  file  formats,  and  guarantee  data  delivery  across  multiple 
enterprises.  
13. IaaS just imitates this established communication and collaboration model to create 
reliable and durable linkage for ensuring smooth data passage between traditional and 
cloud systems over the Web infrastructure. 
14. The use of hub & spoke (H&S) architecture further simplifies the imple- mentation 
and avoids placing an excessive processing burden on the customer sides. The hub is 
installed  at  the  SaaS  provider’s  cloud  center  to  do  the  heavy  lifting  such  as 
reformatting files. A spoke unit at each user site typically acts as basic data transfer 
utility.  
15. With these pieces in place, SaaS providers can offer integration services under the 
same subscription / usage-based pricing model as their core offerings. This trend of 
moving all kinds of common and centralised services to clouds is gaining momentum 
these days.  
16. As resources are getting distributed and decentralised, linking and leveraging them for 
multiple purposes need a multifaceted infrastructure.  
17. Clouds, being the Web-based infrastructures are the best fit for hosting scores of 
unified and utility-like platforms to take care of all sorts of brokering needs among 
connected and distributed ICT systems. 
     1. The Web is the largest digital information superhighway 

 
  41 
     2. The Web is the largest repository of all kinds of resources such as web pages, 
     applications  comprising  enterprise  components,  business  services,  beans,  POJOs, 
     blogs, corporate data, etc. 
3.    The Web is turning out to be the open, cost-effective and generic business execution 
     platform (E-commerce, business, auction, etc. happen in the web for global users) 
     comprising a wider variety of containers, adaptors, drivers, connectors, etc. 
4.    The  Web  is  the  global-scale  communication  infrastructure  (VoIP,  Video 
     conferencing, IP TV etc,) 
5.    The Web is the next-generation discovery, Connectivity, and integration middleware 
     Thus, the unprecedented absorption and adoption of the Internet is the key driver for 
     the continued success of the cloud computing. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  42 
UNIT – III 
Infrastructure as a Service (IAAS) & Platform (PAAS): Virtual machines provisioning 
and Migration services, Virtual Machines Provisioning and Manageability, Virtual Machine 
Migration  Services,  VM  Provisioning  and  Migration  in  Action.  On  the  Management  of 
Virtual  machines  for  Cloud  Infrastructures-  Aneka—Integration  of  Private  and  Public 
Clouds. 
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE (IAAS) & PLATFORM (PAAS) 
INFRASTRUCTURE AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS 
Public  Infrastructure  as  a  Service  providers  commonly  offer  virtual  servers 
containing  one  or  more  CPUs,  running  several  choices  of  operating  systems  and  a 
customized software stack. In addition, storage space and communication facilities are often 
provided. 
Features 
IAAS offers a set of specialized features that can influence the cost benefit ratio to be 
experienced by user  applications  when  moved  to the cloud.  
The most relevant features are:  
1. Geographic distribution of data centers.  
2. Variety of user interfaces and APIs to access the system.  
3. Specialized components and services that aid Particular applications (e.g., 
load- balancers, firewalls). 
4. Choice of virtualization platform and operating systems and  
5. Different billing methods and period (e.g., prepaid vs. postpaid, hourly vs. 
monthly). 
 
Geographic  Presence—  To  improve  availability  and  responsiveness,  a  provider  of 
worldwide services would typically build several data centers distributed around the world. 
For example, Amazon Web Services presents the concept of availability zones and regions 
for  its  EC2  service.  Availability  zones  are  distinct  locations  that  are  engineered  to  be 
insulated from failures in other availability zones and provide inexpensive, low-latency 
network connectivity to other availability zones in the same region. Regions, in turn, are 
geographically dispersed and will be in separate geographic areas or countries. 
 
User Interfaces and Access to Servers— Ideally, a public IaaS provider must provide 
multiple access means to its cloud, thus catering for various users and their preferences. 
Different  types  of user interfaces  (UI) provide  different  levels  of abstraction, the most 
common being graphical user interfaces (GUI), command-line tools (CLI), and Web service 
(WS) APIs. 
     GUIs are preferred by end users who need to launch, customize, and monitor a few 
virtual servers and do not necessarily need to repeat the process several times. On the other 
hand,  CLIs  offer  more  flexibility  and  the possibility  of  automating  repetitive  tasks  via 

 
  43 
scripts (e.g., start and shutdown a number of virtual servers at regular intervals).  
 
 
Advance Reservation of Capacity— Advance reservations allow users to request for an 
IaaS provider to reserve resources for a specific time frame in the future, thus ensuring that 
cloud resources will be available at that time. However, most clouds only support best-
effort requests that means users can request server whenever resources are available .    
Amazon Reserved Instances is a form of advance reservation of capacity, allowing 
users to pay a fixed amount of money in advance to guarantee resource availability at 
anytime during an agreed period and then paying a discounted hourly rate when resources 
are in use. However, only long periods of 1 to 3 years are offered; therefore, users cannot 
express their reservations in finer granularities—for example, hours or days. 
Automatic Scaling and Load Balancing— Automatic scaling is a highly desirable feature 
of IaaS clouds. It allows users to set conditions for when they want their applications to 
scale up and down, based on application-specific metrics such as transactions per second, 
number of simultaneous users, request latency, and so forth. 
When the number of virtual servers is increased by automatic scaling, incoming traffic must 
be automatically distributed among the available servers. This activity enables applications 
to promptly respond to traffic increase while also achieving greater fault tolerance. 
Service-Level Agreement- Service-level agreements (SLAs) are offered by IaaS providers 
to express their commitment to delivery of a certain QoS. To customers it serves as a 
warranty. An SLA usually include availability and performance guarantees. Additionally, 
metrics  must  be  agreed  upon  by  all  parties  as  well  as  penalties  for  violating  these 
expectations. 
Most  IaaS  providers  focus  their  SLA  terms  on  availability  guarantees,  specifying  the 
minimum percentage of time the system will be available during  a certain period.  For 
instance, Amazon EC2 states that “if the annual uptime Percentage for a customer drops 
below 99.95% for the service year, that customer is eligible to receive a service credit equal 
to 10% of their bill.3” 
Hypervisor  and  Operating  System  Choice—  Traditionally,  IaaS  offerings  have  been 
based  on  heavily  customized  open-source  Xen  deployments.  IaaS  providers  needed 
expertise in Linux, networking, virtualization, metering, resource management, and many 
other low-level aspects to successfully deploy and maintain their cloud offerings.  
More  recently,  there has  been  an  emergence  of  turnkey  IaaS  platforms  such  as 
VMWare VCloud and Citrix Cloud Center (C3) which have lowered the barrier of entry for 
IaaS competitors, leading to a rapid expansion in the IaaS marketplace. 
Case Studies 
Amazon Web Services: Amazon WS4 (AWS) is one of the major players in the cloud 
computing market. It pioneered the introduction of IaaS clouds in 2006. It offers a variety 
cloud  services,  most  notably:  S3  (storage),  EC2  (virtual  servers),  Cloudfront  (content 
delivery), Cloudfront Streaming (video streaming), Simple DB (structured datastore), RDS 
(Relational Database), SQS (reliable messaging), and Elastic MapReduce (data processing). 
The ElasticCompute Cloud (EC2) offers Xen-based virtual servers (instances) that can be 

 
  44 
instantiated from Amazon Machine Images (AMIs). Instances are available in a variety of 
sizes, operating systems, architectures, and price. CPU capacity of instances is measured in 
Amazon Compute Units and, although fixed for each instance, vary among instance types 
from 1 (small instance) to 20 (high CPU instance). Each instance provides a certain amount 
of  non  persistent  disk  space;  a  persistence  disk  service  (Elastic  Block  Storage)  allows 
attaching virtual disks to instances with space up to 1TB. Elasticity can be achieved by 
combining the Cloud Watch, Auto Scaling and Elastic Load Balancing features, which 
allow  the  number  of  instances  to  scale  up  and  down  automatically  based  on  a  set  of 
customizable rules, and traffic to be distributed across available instances. Fixed IP address 
(Elastic IPs) are not available by default, but can be obtained at an additional cost. 
 
Flexiscale: Flexiscale is a UK-based provider offering services similar in nature to Amazon 
Web Services.  Flexiscale cloud  provides  the following  features:  available in  UK;  Web 
services  (SOAP),  Web-based  user  interfaces;  access  to  virtual  server  mainly  via  SSH 
(Linux) and Remote Desktop (Windows); 100% availability SLA with automatic recovery 
of  VMs  in  case  of  hardware  failure;  per  hour  pricing;  Linux  and  Windows  operating 
systems; automatic scaling (horizontal/vertical). 
 
Joyent:  Joyent’s  Public  Cloud  offers  servers  based  on  Solaris  containers  virtualization 
technology.  These  servers,  dubbed  accelerators,  allow  deploying  various  specialized 
software- stack based on a customized version of Open- Solaris operating system, which 
include by default a Web-based configuration tool and several pre-installed software, such 
as Apache, MySQL, PHP, Ruby on Rails, and Java. Software load balancing is available as 
an accelerator in addition to hardware load balancers. A notable feature of Joyent’s virtual 
servers is automatic vertical scaling of CPU cores, which means a virtual server can make 
use of additional CPUs automatically up to the maximum number of cores available in the 
physical host. 
The Joyent public cloud offers the following features: multiple geographic locations 
inthe United States; Web-based user interface; access to virtual server via SSH and Web-
based  administration  tool;  100%  availability  SLA;  per  month  pricing;  OS-level 
virtualization  Solaris  containers;  Open-  Solaris  operating  systems;  automatic 
scaling(vertical). 
 
GoGrid: GoGrid, like many other IaaS providers, allows its customers to utilize a range of 
pre- made Windows and Linux images, in a range of fixed instance sizes. GoGrid also 
offers “value- added” stacks on top for applications such as high- volume Web serving, e-
Commerce, and database stores. It offers some notable features, such as a “hybrid hosting” 
facility,  which  combines  traditional  dedicated  hosts  with  auto-scaling  cloud  server 
infrastructure. As part of its core IaaS offerings, GoGrid also provides free hardware load 
balancing, auto-scaling capabilities, and persistent storage, features that typically add an 
additional cost for most other IaaS providers. 
 
Rackspace Cloud Servers: Rackspace Cloud Servers is an IaaS solution that provides 
fixed size instances in the cloud. Cloud Servers offers a range of Linux- based pre-made 
images. A user can request different-sized images, where the size is measured by requested 

 
  45 
RAM, not CPU. 
PLATFORM AS A SERVICE PROVIDERS 
Public Platform as a Service providers commonly offer a development and deployment 
environment that allow users to create and run their applications with little or no concern to 
low-  level  details  of  the  platform.  In  addition,  specific  programming  languages  and 
frameworks are made available in the platform, as well as other services such as persistent 
data storage and in memory caches. 
Features 
Programming  Models,  Languages,  and  Frameworks:  Programming  models  made 
available by IaaS providers define how users can express their applications using higher 
levels of abstraction and efficiently run them on the cloud platform. 
Each model aims at efficiently solving a particular problem. In the cloud computing 
domain, the most common activities that require specialized models are: processing of large 
dataset in clusters of computers (MapReduce model), development of request-based Web 
services and applications; definition and orchestration of business processes in the form of 
workflows  (Workflow  model);  and  high-performance  distributed  execution  of  various 
computational tasks. 
For  user  convenience,  PaaS  providers  usually  support  multiple  programming 
languages. Most commonly used languages in platforms include Python and Java (e.g., 
Google AppEngine), .NET languages (e.g., Microsoft Azure), and Ruby (e.g., Heroku). 
Force.com has devised its own programming language (Apex) and an Excel-like query 
language, which provide higher levels of abstraction to key platform functionalities. 
A variety of software frameworks are usually made available to PaaS developers, 
depending on application focus. Providers that focus on Web and enterprise application 
hosting offer popular frameworks such as Ruby on Rails, Spring, Java EE, and .NET. 
Persistence Options: A persistence layer is essential to allow applications to record their 
state and recover it in case of crashes, as well as to store user data. Web and enterprise 
application  developers  have  chosen  relational  databases  as  the  preferred  persistence 
method.  These  databases  offer  fast  and  reliable  structured  data  storage  and  transaction 
processing,  but  may  lack  scalability  to  handle  several  peta  bytes  of  data  stored  in 
commodity computers. In the cloud computing domain, distributed storage technologies 
have emerged, which seek to be robust and highly scalable, at the expense of relational 
structure and convenient query languages. 
  
CASE STUDIES 
Aneka: Aneka is a .NET-based service-oriented resource management and development 
platform. Each server in an Aneka deployment (dubbed Aneka cloud node) hosts the Aneka 
container, which provides the base infrastructure that consists of services for persistence, 
security (authorization, authentication and auditing), and communication (message handling 
and dispatching). Cloud nodes can be either physical server, virtual machines (Xen Server 
and VMware are supported), and instances rented from Amazon EC2. The Aneka container 
can also host any number of optional services that can be added by developers to augment 
the capabilities of an Aneka Cloud node, thus providing a single, extensible framework for 

 
  46 
orchestrating various application models. 
Several programming models are supported by such task models to enable execution 
of legacy HPC applications and Map Reduce, which enables a variety of data-mining and 
search applications. Users request resources via a client to a reservation services manager of 
the Aneka master node, which manages all cloud nodes and contains scheduling service to 
distribute request to cloud nodes. 
App Engine: Google App Engine lets you run your Python and Java Web applications on 
elastic infrastructure supplied by Google. App Engine allows your applications to scale 
dynamically as your traffic and data storage requirements increase or decrease. It gives 
developers a choice between a Python stack and Java. The App Engine serving architecture 
is notable in that it allows real-time auto- scaling without virtualization for many common 
types of Web applications. However, such auto-scaling is dependent on the application 
developer using a limited subset of the native APIs on each platform, and in some instances 
you need to use specific Google APIs such as URLFetch, Data store, and mem cache in 
place of certain native API calls. For example, a deployed App Engine application cannot 
write to the file system directly (you must use the Google Data store) or open a socket or 
access another host directly (you must use Google URL fetch service). A Java application 
cannot create a new Thread either. 
Microsoft Azure: Microsoft Azure Cloud Services offers developers a hosted. NET Stack 
(C#,  VB.Net,  ASP.NET).  In  addition,  a  Java  &  Ruby  SDK  for  .NET  Services  is  also 
available. The Azure system consists of a number of elements. The Windows Azure Fabric 
Controller provides auto-scaling and reliability, and it manages memory resources and load 
balancing. The .NET Service Bus registers and connects applications together. The .NET 
Access  Control  identity  providers  include  enterprise  directories  and  Windows  LiveID. 
Finally, the .NET Workflow allows construction and execution of workflow instances. 
Force.com: In conjunction with the Salesforce.com service, the Force.com PaaS allows 
developers to create add-on functionality that integrates into main Salesforce CRM SaaS 
application. Force.com offers developers two approaches to create applications that can be 
deployed  on  its  SaaS  plaform:  a  hosted  Apex  or  Visualforce  application.  Apex  is  a 
proprietary Java-like language that can be used to create Salesforce applications. Visual 
force is an XML-like syntax for building UIs in HTML, AJAX, or Flex to overlay over the 
Salesforce hosted CRM system. An application store called App Exchange is also provided, 
which offers a paid & free application directory. 
Heroku: Heroku is a platform for instant deployment of Ruby on Rails Web applications. 
In the Heroku system, servers are invisibly managed by the platform and are never exposed 
to users. Applications are automatically dispersed across different CPU cores and servers, 
maximizing performance and minimizing contention. Heroku has an advanced logic layer 
than can automatically route around failures, ensuring seamless and uninterrupted service at 
all times. 
Public Cloud and Infrastructure Services 
1. Public  cloud  or  external  cloud  describes  cloud  computing  in  a  traditional 
mainstream sense, whereby resources are dynamically provisioned via publicly 
accessible Web applications/Web services (SOAP or RESTful interfaces) from an 
off-site third-party provider.  

 
  47 
2. Who shares resources and bills on a fine-grained utility computing basis, the 
user pays only for the capacity of the provisioned resources at a particular time. 
3. Examples for vendors who publicly provide IaaS:  
1. Amazon Elastic  Compute  Cloud  (EC2). 
2. GoGrid 
3. Joyent Accelerator 
4. Rackspace 
5. AppNexus 
6. FlexiScale and Manjrasoft Aneka 
4. Amazon  Elastic  Compute  Cloud  (EC2)  is  an  IaaS  service  that  provides  elastic 
compute capacity in the cloud.  
5. These services can be leveraged via Web services (SOAP or REST), a Web-based 
AWS (Amazon Web Service) management console, or the EC2 command line tools.  
6. The  Amazon  service  provides  hundreds  of  pre-made  AMIs  (Amazon  Machine 
Images) with a variety of operating systems (i.e., Linux, OpenSolaris, or Windows) 
and pre-loaded software.  
7. Provides complete control of computing resources run on Amazon’s computing and 
infrastructure environment easily 
8. Reduces  the  time  required  for  obtaining  and  booting  a  new  server’s  instances  to 
minutes 
9. Allows  a  quick  scalable  capacity  and  resources,  up  and  down  as  the  computing 
requirements change  Offers different instances’ size according to 
1. The resources’ needs (small, large, and extra large) 
2. The  high  CPU’s  needs  it  provides  (medium  and  extra  large  high  CPU 
instances) 
3. High-memory instances (extra large, double extra large, and quadruple extra 
large instance) 
10. Amazon  EC2  is  a  widely  known  example  for  vendors  that  provide  public  cloud 
services. 
11. Eucalyptus and Open-Nebula are two complementary and enabling technologies for 
open source cloud tools, which play an invaluable role in infrastructure as a service 
and in building private, public, and hybrid cloud architecture. 
1. The Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud) is a Web service that allows users 
to provision new machines into Amazon’s virtualized infrastructure in a matter 
of minutes using a publicly available API 
2.  EC2 instance is typically a virtual machine with a certain amount of RAM, 
CPU, and storage capacity. 

 
  48 
12. Amazon EC2 provides its customers with three flexible purchasing models to make it 
easy for the cost optimization: 
1. On-Demand instances: which allow you to pay a fixed rate by the hourwith no 
commitment. 
2. Reserved instances: which allow you to pay a low, one-time fee and in turn 
receive a significant discount on the hourly usage charge for that instance. It 
ensures  that  any  reserved  instance  you  launch  is  guaranteed  to  succeed 
(provided that you have booked them in advance). This means that users of 
these instances should  not be  affected  by  any  transient limitations in EC2 
capacity. 
3. Spot instances: which enable you to bid whatever price you want for instance 
capacity, providing for even greater savings, if your applications have flexible 
start and end times. 
13. Amazon Elastic Load Balancer is another service that helps in building fault- tolerant 
applications  by  automatically  provisioning  incoming  application  workload  across 
available Amazon EC2 instances and in multiple availability zones. 
Private Cloud and Infrastructure Services 
     A private cloud aims at providing public cloud functionality, but on private resources: 
1. Maintaining control over an organization’s data and resources to meet security and 
governance’s requirements in an organization.  
2. Private  cloud  exhibits  a  highly  virtualized  cloud  data  center  located  inside  your 
organization’s firewall.  
3. It may also be a private space dedicated for your company within a cloud vendor’s 
data center designed to handle the organization’s workloads. 
 
Private clouds exhibit the following characteristics: 
1. Allow service provisioning and compute capability for an organization’s users in a 
self-service manner. 
2.  Automate and provide well-managed virtualized environments. 
3.  Optimize computing resources, and servers’ utilization. 
4. Support specific workloads. 
Examples for vendors and frameworks that provide Iaas in private setups 
1. Eucalyptus (elastic utility computing architecture linking your programs to useful 
systems) 
2. Open Nebula 
Eucalyptus: Eucalyptus is an open-source infrastructure for the implementation of cloud 
computing on computer clusters. It is considered one of the earliest tools developed as a surge 

 
  49 
computing  (in  which  data  center’s  private  cloud  could  augment  its  ability  to  handle 
workload’s spikes by a design that allows it to send overflow work to a public cloud) tool. Its 
name is an acronym for “elastic utility computing architecture for linking your programs 
to useful systems.” 
Eucalyptus features : 
1. Interface  compatibility  with  EC2,  and  S3  (both  Web  service  and  Query/REST 
[Representational State Transfer] interfaces). 
2. Simple installation and deployment. 
3. Support for most Linux distributions (source and binary packages). 
4. Support for running VMs that run atop the Xen hypervisor or KVM. 
5. Support for other kinds of VMs, such as VMware, is targeted for future releases. 
6. Secure internal communication using SOAP (Simple Object Access Protocol) with 
WS security. 
7. Cloud administrator’s tool for system’s management and user’s accounting. 
8. The ability to configure multiple clusters each with private internal network addresses 
into a single cloud. 
9. Eucalyptus aims at fostering the research in models for service’s 
10. provisioning, scheduling, SLA formulation, and hypervisors’ portability. 
 
Eucalyptus Architecture: 
 
 
1. Node  controller  (NC)controls  the  execution,  inspection,  and  termination  of  VM 
instances on the host where it runs. 
2. Cluster controller (CC) gathers information about and schedules VM execution on 
specific node controllers, as well as manages virtual instance network. 

 
  50 
3. Storage  controller  (SC)  is  a  put/get  storage  service  that  implements  Amazon’s 
S3(Simple Storage Service) interface and provides a way for storing and accessing 
VM images and user data. 
4. Cloud controller (CLC) is the entry point into the cloud for users and administrators. 
It  queries  node  managers  for  information  about  resources,  makes  high-level 
scheduling decisions, and implements them by making requests to cluster controllers. 
5. Walrus (W) is the controller component that manages access to the storage services 
within  Eucalyptus.  Requests  are  been  communicated  to  Walrus  using  the  SOAP 
(Simple Object Access Protocol) or REST (Representational State Transfer) based 
interface 
 
Hybrid Cloud and Infrastructure Services 
A third type of cloud setup named Hybrid cloud 
1. A combination of private/internal and external cloud resources existing together by 
enabling outsourcing of noncritical services and functions in public cloud and keeping 
the critical ones internal 
 
2. Main function of Hybrid cloud is to release resources from a public cloud and handle 
sudden demand usage called cloud bursting 
 
Distributed Management of Virtualization 
     Virtualization’s benefits bring their own challenges and complexities presented in the 
need for a powerful management capabilities. That is why many commercial, open source 
products and research projects such as OpenNebula, IBM Virtualization Manager, Joyent, 
and VMware DRS are been developed to be dynamically provision virtual machines, utilizing 
the  physical  infrastructure.  There  are  also  some  commercial  and  scientific  infrastructure 
cloud computing initiatives, such as Globus VWS, Eucalyptus and Amazon, which provide 
remote interfaces for controlling and monitoring virtual resources.  
     One more effort in this context is the RESERVOIR initiative, in which grid interfaces 
and  protocols  enable  the  required  interoperability  between  the  clouds  or  infrastructure’s 
providers.  
High Availability 
     High availability is a system design protocol and an associated implementation that 
ensures  a  certain  absolute  degree  of  operational  continuity  during  a  given  measurement 
period. Availability refers to the ability of a user’s community to access the system—whether 
for submitting new work, updating or altering existing work, or collecting the results of the 
previous work.  
Cloud and Virtualization Standardization Efforts 
     Standardization  is  important  to  ensure  interoperability  between  virtualization 
management  vendors,  the  virtual  machines  produced  by  each  one  of  them,  and  cloud 
computing. In the past few years, virtualization standardization efforts led by the Distributed 

 
  51 
Management  Task  Force (DMTF)  have produced standards for almost all  the  aspects of 
virtualization technology.  
     DMTF initiated the VMAN (Virtualization Management Initiative), which delivers 
broadly  supported  interoperability  and  portability  standards  for  managing  the  virtual 
computing lifecycle. VMAN’s OVF (Open Virtualization Format) in a collaboration between 
industry key players: Dell, HP, IBM, Microsoft, XenSource, and Vmware.  
OVF (Open Virtualization Format) 
1. VMAN’s OVF (Open Virtualization Format) in a collaboration between industry key 
players: Dell, HP, IBM, Microsoft, XenSource, and Vmware. 
2. OVF  specification  provides  a  common  format  to  package  and  securely  distribute 
virtual appliances across multiple virtualization platforms. 
3. VMAN profiles define  a  consistent way of managing a heterogeneous virtualized 
environment 
OCCI and OGF 
     Open  Grid  Forum  (OGF)  organizing  an  official  new  working  group  to  deliver  a 
standard  API  for  cloud  IaaS,  the  Open  Cloud  Computing  Interface  Working  Group 
(OCCIWG).  This  group  is  dedicated  for  delivering  an  API  specification  for  the  remote 
management  of  cloud  computing’s  infrastructure  and  for  allowing  the  development  of 
interoperable  tools  for  common  tasks  including  deployment,  autonomic  scaling,  and 
monitoring.  The  scope  of  the  specification  will  be  covering  a  high-level  functionality 
required  for  managing  the  life-cycle  virtual  machines  (or  workloads),  running  on 
virtualization technologies (or containers), and supporting service elasticity. The new API for 
interfacing “IaaS” cloud computing facilities will allow  
1. Consumers to interact with cloud computing infrastructure on an ad hoc basis. 
2.  Integrators to offer advanced management services. 
3.  Aggregators to offer a single common interface to multiple providers. Providers to 
offer a standard interface that is compatible with the available tools. 
4. Vendors of  grids/clouds  to  offer  standard  interfaces  for  dynamically  scalable 
service’s delivery in their products. 
VM Provisioning Process 
     Typical life cycle of VM and its major possible states of operation, which make the 
management and automation of VMs in virtual and cloud environments easier Process & Steps to 
Provision VM. Here, we describe the common and normal steps of provisioning a virtual 
server: 
1. Firstly, you need to select a server from a pool of available servers (physical servers 
with enough capacity) along with the appropriate OS template you need to provision 
the virtual machine. 
2. Secondly, you need to load the appropriate software (operating system you selected in 
the previous step, device drivers, middleware, and the needed applications for the 
service required). 

 
  52 
3. Thirdly, you need to customize and configure the machine (e.g., IP address, Gateway) 
to configure an associated network and storage resources. 
4. Finally, the virtual server is ready to start with its newly loaded software. Typically, 
these are the tasks required or being performed by an IT or a data center’s specialist to 
provision a particular virtual machine. 
     virtual machines can be provisioned by manually installing an operating system, by 
using a preconfigured VM template, by cloning an existing VM, or by importing a physical 
server  or  a  virtual  server  from  another  hosting  platform.  Physical  servers  can  also  be 
virtualized and provisioned using P2V (physical to virtual) tools and techniques (e.g., virt-
p2v). 
     After creating a virtual machine by virtualizing a physical server, or by building a 
new virtual server in the virtual environment, a template can be  created out of it.  Most 
virtualization  management  vendors  (VMware,  XenServer,  etc.)  provide  the  data  center’s 
administration with the ability to do such tasks in an easy way.  
     Provisioning from a template is an invaluable feature, because it reduces the time 
required to create a new virtual machine. Administrators can create different templates for 
different purposes. For example, you can create a Windows 2003 Server template for the 
finance department, or a Red Hat Linux template for the engineering department.  
     This  enables  the  administrator  to  quickly  provision  a  correctly  configured  virtual 
server on demand. This ease and flexibility bring with them the problem of virtual machine’s 
sprawl, where virtual machines are provisioned so rapidly that documenting and managing 
the virtual machine’s life cycle become a challenge 
 
VIRTUAL MACHINE MIGRATION SERVICES 
Migration service, in the context of virtual machines, is the process of moving a virtual 
machine from one host server or storage location to another; there aredifferent techniques of 
VM migration, hot/life migration, cold/regular migration, and live storage migration of a 
virtual machine. In this process, all key machine components, such as CPU, storage disks, 
networking, and memory, are completely virtualized, thereby facilitating the entire state of a 
virtual machine to be captured by a set of easily moved data files. Here are some of the 
migration’s techniques that most virtualization tools provide as a feature. 

 
  53 
Migrations Techniques 
Live Migration and High Availability.  
Live  migration  (which  is  also  called  hot  or  real-time  migration)  can  be  defined  as  the 
movement of a virtual machine from one physical host to another while being powered on. 
When it is properly carried out, this process takes place without any noticeable effect from 
the  end  user’s  point  of  view  (a  matter  of  milliseconds).  One  of  the  most  significant 
advantages of live migration is the fact that it facilitates proactive maintenance in case of 
failure, because the potential problem can be resolved before the disruption of service occurs. 
Live migration can also be used for load balancing in which work is shared among computers 
in order to optimize the utilization of available CPU resources.  
Live Migration Anatomy, Xen Hypervisor Algorithm.  
In this section we will explain live migration’s mechanism and how memory and virtual 
machine states are being transferred, through the network, from one host A to another host B, 
the Xen hypervisor is an example for this mechanism. The logical steps that are executed 
when migrating an OS are summarized in the diagram below In this research, the migration 
process has been viewed as a transactional interaction between the two hosts involved 
 
Migration Techniques: 
 Stage 0: Pre-Migration 
◦ An active virtual machine exists on the physical host A 
 Stage 1: Reservation 
◦ A request is issued to migrate an OS from host A to B.  
◦ The necessary    resources exist on B and on a VM container of that size. 
 Stage 2: Iterative Pre-Copy 
◦ During the first iteration, all pages are transferred from A to B 
◦ Subsequent iterations copy only those pages dirtied during the previous transfer 
phase 
 Stage 3: Stop-and-Copy 
◦ Running OS instance at A is suspended 
◦ The network traffic is redirected to B 
◦ CPU state and any remaining inconsistent memory pages are then transferred 
◦ At the end of this stage, there is a consistent suspended copy of the VM at both A 
and B. 
◦ Copy at A is considered primary and is resumed in case of failure 
 Stage 4:Commitment 
◦ Host B indicates to A that it has successfully received a consistent OS image 
◦ Host A acknowledges this message as a commitment of the migration transaction 
◦ Host A may now discard the original VM 
◦ Host B becomes the primary host 
 Stage 5: Activation 
 The migrated VM on B is now activated 

 
  54 
 Post-migration code runs to reattach the device’s drivers to the new machine and 
advertise moved IP addresses 
 
 
Live Migration Effect on a Running Web Server.  
     Clark et al. Did evaluate the above migration on an Apache 1.3 Web server; this 
served static content at a high rate as shown in diagram below. The throughput is achieved 
when continuously serving a single 512-kB file to a set of one hundred concurrent clients. 
The Web server virtual machine has a memory allocation of 800 MB. At the start of the trace, 
the server achieves a consistent throughput of approximately 870 Mbit/sec.  
     Migration starts 27 sec into the trace, but is initially rate-limited to 100 Mbit/sec (12% 
CPU),  resulting  in  server’s  throughput  drop  to  765  Mbit/sec.  This  initial  low-rate  pass 
transfers 776 MB and lasts for 62 sec. At this point, the migration’s algorithm, described in 
Section 5.4.1, increases its rate over several iterations and finally suspends the VM after a 
further 9.8 sec. The final stop-and-copy phase then transfers the remaining pages, and the 
Web server resumes at full rate after a 165-msec outage. This simple example demonstrates 
that a highly loaded server can be migrated with both controlled impact on live services and a 
short downtime. However, the working set of the server, in this case, is rather small. So, this 
should be expected as a relatively easy case of live migration.  

 
  55 
Live Migration Vendor Implementations Examples.  
There are lots of VM management and provisioning tools that provide the live migration of 
VM facility, two of which are VMware VMotion and Citrix XenServer “XenMotion.” 
VMware Vmotion.  
This  allows users  to  automatically  optimize and  allocate  an  entire  pool  of  resources for 
maximum  hardware  utilization,  flexibility,  and  availability  and  perform  hardware’s 
maintenance without scheduled downtime along with migrating virtual machines away from 
failing or underperforming servers.  
Citrix XenServer XenMotion.  
This is a nice feature of the Citrix XenServer product, inherited from the Xen live migrate 
utility, which provides the IT administrator with the facility to move a running VM from one 
XenServer to another in the same pool without interrupting the service (hypothetically for 
zero-downtime  server  maintenance,  which  actually  takes  minutes),  making  it  a  highly 
available service. This also can be a good feature to balance the workloads on the virtualized 
environment.  
Regular/Cold Migration.  
Cold migration is the migration of a powered-off virtual machine. With cold migration, you 
have the option of moving the associated disks from one data store to another. The virtual 
machines are not required to be on a shared storage. 
 It’s important to highlight that the two main differences between live migration and 
cold migration are that live migration needs a shared storage for virtual machines in the 
server’s pool, but cold migration does not and also in live migration for a virtual machine 
between two hosts, there would be certain CPU compatibility checks to be applied; while in 
cold migration this checks do not apply.  
The cold migration process is simple to implement and it can be summarized as follows: 
1. The configuration files, including the NVRAM file (BIOS settings), log files, as well 
as the disks of the virtual machine, are moved from the source host to the destination 
host’s associated storage area. 
2. The virtual machine is registered with the new host.  
3. After the migration is completed, the old version of the virtual machine is deleted 
from the source host.  

 
  56 
Live Storage Migration of Virtual Machine.  
This kind of migration constitutes moving the virtual disks or configuration file of a running 
virtual machine to a new data store without any interruption in the availability of the virtual 
machine’s service.  
Migration of Virtual Machines to Alternate Platforms 
 One of the nicest advantages of having facility in data center’s technologies is to have 
the ability to migrate virtual machines from one platform to another. There are a number of 
ways for achieving this, such as depending on the source and target virtualization’s platforms 
and on the vendor’s tools that manage this facility—for example, the VMware converter that 
handles migrations between ESX hosts; the VMware server; and the VMware workstation. 
The VMware converter can also import from other virtualization platforms, such as Microsoft 
virtual server machines. 
VIRTUAL MACHINES PROVISIONING AND MANAGEABILITY  
     The typical life cycle of VM and its major possible states of operation, which make 
the management and automation of VMs in virtual and cloud environments easier than in 
traditional computing environments.  
     As shown in the diagram below the cycle starts by a request delivered to the IT 
department, stating the requirement for creating a new server for a particular service. This 
request is being processed by the IT administration to start seeing the servers’ resource pool, 
matching these resources with the requirements, and starting the provision of the needed 
virtual machine. Once it is provisioned and started, it is ready to provide the required service 
according to an SLA, or a time period after which the virtual is being released; and free 
resources, in this case, won’t be needed. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
VM PROVISIONING AND MIGRATION IN ACTION  
     Now, it is time to get into business with a real example of how we can manage the life 
cycle,  provision,  and  migrate  a  virtual  machine  by  the  help  of  one  of  the  open  source 
frameworks used to manage virtualized infrastructure.  
 
     Here,  we  will  use ConVirt (open source  framework  for the  management of open 
source  virtualization  like  Xen  and  KVM  known  previously  as  XenMan).  Deployment 
Scenario. ConVirt deployment consists of at least one ConVirt workstation, where ConVirt is 
installed and ran, which provides the main console for managing the VM life cycle, managing 
images, provisioning new VMs, monitoring machine resources, and so on.  

 
  57 
 
There are two essential deployment scenarios for ConVirt:  
1. Basic configuration in which the Xen or KVM virtualization platform is on the local 
machine, where ConVirt is already installed.  
2. An advanced configuration in which the Xen or KVM is on one or more remote 
servers. The scenario in use here is the advanced one.  In data centers, it is very 
common to install centralized management software (ConVirt here) on a dedicated 
machine for use in managing remote servers in the data center.  
 
In our example, we will use this dedicated machine where ConVirt is installed and used to 
manage  a  pool  of  remote  servers  (two  machines).  In  order  to  use  advanced  features  of 
ConVirt (e.g., live migration), you should set up a shared storage for the server pool in use on 
which the disks of the provisioned virtual machines are stored.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Installation 
The installation process involves the following:  
1. Installing ConVirt on at least one computer. See reference 28 for installation details. 
2. Preparing  each  managed  server  to  be  managed  by  ConVirt.  See  reference  28  for 
managed  servers’  installation  details.  We  have  two  managing  servers  with  the 
following  Ips  (managed  server  1,  IP:172.16.2.22;  and  managed  server  2, 
IP:172.16.2.25) as shown in the deployment diagram (Figure 5.7).  
3. Starting ConVirt and discovering the managed servers you have prepared.  
 
Notes  
1. Try  to  follow  the  installation  steps  existing  in  reference  28  according  to  the 
distribution of the operating system in use. In our experiment, we use Ubuntu 8.10 in 
our setup.  
2. Make sure that the managed servers include Xen or KVM hypervisors installed. 
3.  Make sure that you can access managed servers from your ConVirt management 
console through SSH. 
Environment, Software, and Hardware: ConVirt 1.1, Linux Ubuntu 8.10, three machines, 
Dell core 2 due processor, 4G RAM.  
Adding Managed Servers and Provisioning VM: Once the installation is done and you are 
ready to manage your  virtual infrastructure, then  you can start the ConVirt management 
console. 

 
  58 
     Select any of servers’ pools existing (QA Lab in our scenario) and on its context 
menu, select “Add Server”. 
1. You will be faced with a message asking about the virtualization platform you want to 
manage (Xen or KVM). 
2. Choose KVM, and then enter the managed server information and credentials (IP, 
username, and password). 
3. Once the server is synchronized and authenticated with the management console, it 
will appear in the left pane/of the ConVirt. 
4. Select this server, and start provisioning your virtual machine. 
5. Fill in the virtual machine’s information (name, storage, OS template, etc) then you 
will find it created on the managed server tree powered-off. Note: While provisioning 
your virtual machine, make sure that you create disks on the shared storage (NFS or 
iSCSi).  You  can  do  so  by  selecting  the  “provisioning”  tab,  and  changing  the 
VM_DISKS_DIR to point to the location of your shared NFS. 
6. Start your VM (Figures 5.14 and 5.15), and make sure the installation media of the 
operating system you need is placed in drive, in order to use it for booting the new 
VM  and  proceed  in  the  installation  process;  then  start  the  installation  process  as 
shown in Figure 5.16.  
7. Once the installation finishes, you can access your provisioned virtual machine from 
the console icon on the top of your ConVirt management console.  
8. Reaching  this  step,  you  have  created  your  first  managed  server  and  provisioned 
virtual machine. You can repeat the same procedure to add the second managed server 
in your pool to be ready for the next step of migrating one virtual machine from one 
server to the other. 
9. To start the migration of a virtual machine from one host to the other, select it and 
choose a migrating virtual machine. 
10.  You will have a window containing all the managed servers in your data center. 
Choose one as a destination and start 
11. Once the virtual machine has been successfully placed and migrated to the destination 
host, you can see it still living and working. 
ON  THE  MANAGEMENT  OF  VIRTUAL  MACHINES  FOR  CLOUD 
INFRASTRUCTURES 
In 2006, Amazon started offering virtual machines (VMs) to anyone with a credit card for 
just  $0.10/hour  through its Elastic  Compute Cloud  (EC2) service. Although not the first 
company to lease VMs, the programmer-friendly EC2 Web services API and their pay-as-
you-go pricing popularized the “Infrastructure as a Service” (IaaS) paradigm, which is now 
closely related to the notion of a “cloud.”  
Following the success of Amazon EC2, several other IaaS cloud providers, or public clouds, 
have  emerged—such  as  Elastic-  Hosts,  GoGrid,  and  FlexiScale—that  provide  a  publicly 

 
  59 
accessible interface for purchasing and managing computing infrastructure that is instantiated 
as VMs running on the provider’s data center.  
There is also a growing ecosystem of technologies and tools to build private clouds—where 
inhouse resources are virtualized, and internal users can request and manage these resources 
using interfaces similar or equal to those of public clouds—and hybrid clouds—where an 
organization’s private cloud can supplement its capacity using a public cloud.  
THE ANATOMY OF CLOUD INFRASTRUCTURES 
     There are many commercial IaaS cloud providers in the market, such as those cited 
earlier, and all of them share five characteristics:  
     (i) They provide on-demand provisioning of computational resources. 
     (ii) they use virtualization technologies to lease these resources. 
     (iii) they provide public and simple remote interfaces to manage those resources 
     (iv) they use a pay-as-you-go cost model, typically charging by the hour 
     (v) they operate data centers large enough to provide a seemingly unlimited amount of 
     resources  to  their  clients  (usually  touted  as  “infinite  capacity”  or  “unlimited 
     elasticity”). 
1. Private  and  hybrid  clouds  share  these  same  characteristics  but,  instead  of  selling 
capacity  over  publicly  accessible  interfaces,  focus  on  providing  capacity  to  an 
organization’s internal users.  
2. Virtualization  technologies  have  been  the  key  enabler  of  many  of  these  salient 
characteristics of IaaS clouds by giving providers a more flexible and generic way of 
managing  their  resources.  Thus,  virtual  infrastructure  (VI)  management—the 
management of virtual machines distributed across a pool of physical resources—
becomes  a  key  concern  when  building  an  IaaS  cloud  and  poses  a  number  of 
challenges.  
3. Virtual infrastructure management in private clouds has to deal with an additional 
problem: Unlike large IaaS cloud providers, such as Amazon, private clouds typically 
do  not  have  enough  resources  to  provide  the  illusion  of  “infinite  capacity.”  The 
immediate  provisioning  scheme  used  in  public  clouds,  where  resources  are 
provisioned at the moment they are requested, is ineffective in private clouds.  
4. Several VI management solutions have emerged over time, such as platform ISF and 
VMware vSphere, along with open-source initiatives such as Enomaly Computing 
Platform and Ovirt.  
5. However, managing virtual infrastructures in a private/hybrid cloud is a different, 
albeit similar, problem than managing a virtualized data center, and existing tools lack 
several features that are required for building IaaS clouds.  

 
  60 
Distributed Management of Virtual Machines 
     The first problem is how to manage the virtual infrastructures themselves. Although 
resource management has been extensively studied, particularly for job management in high-
performance computing, managing VMs poses additional problems that do not arise when 
managing jobs, such as the need to set up custom software environments forVMs, setting up 
and managing networking for interrelated VMs, and reducing the various overheads involved 
in using VMs.  
1. Thus, VI managers must be able to efficiently orchestrate all these different tasks. The 
problem of efficiently selecting or scheduling computational resources is well known.  
2. However,  the  state  of  the  art  in  VM-based  resource  scheduling  follows  a  static 
approach, where resources are initially selected using a greedy allocation strategy, 
with minimal or no support for other placement policies.  
3. To efficiently schedule resources, VI managers must be able to support flexible and 
complex  scheduling  policies  and  must  leverage  the  ability  of  VMs  to  suspend, 
resume,  and  migrate.  This  complex  task  is  one  of  the  core  problems  that  the 
RESERVOIR(Resources and Services Virtualization without Barriers) project tries to solve.  
Reservation-Based Provisioning of Virtualized Resources 
 A particularly interesting problem when provisioning virtual infrastructures is how to deal 
with situations where the demand for resources is known beforehand— for example, when an 
experiment depending on some complex piece of equipment is going to run from 2 pm to 4 
pm, and computational resources must be available at exactly that time to process the data 
produced by the equipment. Commercial cloud providers, such as Amazon, have enough 
resources to provide the illusion of infinite capacity, which means that this situation is simply 
resolved by requesting the resources exactly when needed; if capacity is “infinite,” then there 
will be resources available at 2 pm. On the other hand, when dealing with finite capacity, a 
different  approach  is  needed.  However,  the  intuitively  simple  solution  of  reserving  the 
resources beforehand turns out to not be so simple, because it is known to cause resources to 
be  underutilized,  due  to  the  difficulty  of  scheduling  other  requests  around  an  inflexible 
reservation. VMs allow us to overcome the utilization problems typically associated with 
advance reservations and we describe Haizea, a VM-based lease manager supporting advance 
reservation along with other provisioning models not supported in existing IaaS clouds, such 
as best-effort provisioning. 
Provisioning to Meet SLA Commitments  
     IaaS clouds can be used to deploy services that will be consumed by users other than 
the one that deployed the services. For example, a company might depend on an IaaS cloud 
provider to deploy three-tier applications (Web front-end, application server, and database 
server) for its customers. In this case, there is a distinction between the cloud consumer (i.e., 
the service owner) and the end users of the resources provisioned on the cloud (the service 
user).  
     Furthermore, service owners will enter into service-level  agreements  (SLAs) with 
their end users, covering guarantees such as the timeliness with which these services will 

 
  61 
respond. However, cloud providers are typically not directly exposed to the service semantics 
or the SLAs that service owners may contract with their end users. The capacity requirements 
are less predictable and more elastic.  
     The cloud provider’s task is, therefore, to make sure that resource allocation requests 
are satisfied with specific probability and timeliness. These requirements are formalized in 
infrastructure SLAs between the service owner and cloud provider, separate from the high-
level SLAs between the service owner and its end users.  
     RESERVOIR  proposes  a  flexible  framework  where  service  owners  may  register 
service-specific elasticity rules and monitoring probes, and these rules are being executed to 
match environment conditions.  
     Elasticity of the application should be contracted and formalized as part of capacity 
availability  SLA  between  the  cloud  provider  and  service  owner.  This  poses  interesting 
research issues on the IaaS side, which can be grouped around two main topics:  
1. SLA-oriented  capacity  planning  that  guarantees  that  there  is  enough  capacity  to 
guarantee service elasticity with minimal over-provisioning.  
2. Continuous resource placement and scheduling optimization that lowers operational 
costs and takes advantage of available capacity transparently to the service  while 
keeping the service SLAs.  
ANEKA—INTEGRATION OF PRIVATE AND PUBLIC CLOUDS 
 
1. Aneka is a software platform and a framework for developing distributed applications 
on the cloud. It harnesses the computing resources of a heterogeneous network of 
workstations and servers or data centers on demand. Aneka provides developers with 
a  rich  set  of  APIs  for  transparently  exploiting  these  resources  by  expressing  the 
application logic with a variety of programming abstractions. System administrators 
can leverage a collection of tools to monitor and control the deployed infrastructure.  
2. This can be a public cloud available to anyone through the Internet, a private cloud 
constituted by a set of nodes with restricted access within an enterprise, or a hybrid 
cloud where external resources are integrated on demand, thus allowing applications 
to scale.  Diagram below provides a layered view of the framework.  
3. Aneka is essentially an implementation of the PaaS model, and it provides a runtime 
environment for executing applications by leveraging the underlying infrastructure of 
the cloud. Developers can express distributed applications by using the API contained 
in the Software Development Kit (SDK) or by porting existing legacy applications to 
the cloud.  
4. Such applications are executed on the Aneka cloud, represented by a collection of 
nodes connected through the network hosting the Aneka container.  
5. The container is the building block of the middleware and represents the runtime 
environment  for  executing  applications;  it  contains  the  core  functionalities  of  the 

 
  62 
system  and  is  built  up  from  an  extensible  collection  of  services  that  allow 
administrators to customize the Aneka cloud. There are three classes of services that 
characterize the container:  
6. Execution Services. They are responsible for scheduling and executing applications. 
Each  of  the  programming  models  supported  by  Aneka  defines  specialized 
implementations  of  these  services  for  managing  the  execution  of  a  unit  of  work 
defined in the model.  
7. Foundation  Services.  These  are  the  core  management  services  of  the  Aneka 
container.  They  are  in  charge  of  metering  applications,  allocating  resources  for 
execution,  managing  the  collection  of  available  nodes,  and  keeping  the  services 
registry updated.  
8. Fabric Services: They constitute the lowest level of the services stack of Aneka and 
provide access to the resources managed by the cloud. An important service in this 
layer is the Resource Provisioning Service, which enables horizontal scaling3 in the 
cloud. Resource provisioning makes Aneka elastic and allows it to grow or to shrink 
dynamically to meet the QoS requirements of applications.  
9. Aneka also provides a tool for managing the cloud, allowing administrators to easily 
start, stop, and deploy instances of the Aneka container on new resources and then 
reconfigure them dynamically to alter the behavior of the cloud. 
 
Ane
ka 
Res
ourc
e 
Pro
visio
ning 
Serv
ice 
1. C
l
o
u
d
 
c
o
m
p

 
  63 
uting has the ability to automatically scale out 
1. Based on demand and users’ quality of service requests 
2. Aneka is a PaaS 
1. Features multiple programming models allowing developers to easily build 
their distributed applications 
2. Provides resource provisioning facilities in a seamless and dynamic fashion 
3. Achieved by means of the resource provisioning framework 
3. A typical scenario that a medium or large enterprise may encounter 
1. Combines privately owned resources with public rented resources to 
dynamically increase the resource capacity to a larger scale 
4. Private resources identify computing and storage elements kept in the premises. They 
share similar internal security and administrative policies 
 
CHALLENGES AND RISKS: 
Despite the initial success and popularity of the cloud computing paradigm and the extensive 
availability of providers and tools, a significant number of challenges and risks are inherent 
to this new model of computing. Providers, developers, and end users must consider these 
challenges and risks to take good advantage of cloud computing. Issues to be faced include 

 
  64 
user  privacy,  data  security,  data  lock-in,  availability  of  service,  disaster  recovery, 
performance, scalability, energy-efficiency, and programmability. 
Security, Privacy, and Trust: Security and privacy affect the entire cloud computing stack, 
since there is a massive use of third-party services and infrastructures that are used to host 
important data or to perform critical operations. In this scenario, the trust toward providers is 
fundamental to ensure the desired level of privacy for applications hosted in the cloud. Legal 
and regulatory issues also need attention. When data are moved into the Cloud, providers 
may choose to locate them anywhere on the planet. The physical location of data centers 
determines the set of laws that can be applied to the management of data. For example, 
specific cryptography techniques could not be used because they are not allowed in some 
countries.  Similarly,  country  laws  can  impose  that  sensitive  data,  such  as  patient  health 
records, are to be stored within national borders. 
Data Lock-In and Standardization: A major concern of cloud computing users is about 
having  their  data  locked-in  by  a  certain  provider.  Users  may  want  to  move  data  and 
applications out from a provider that does not meet their requirements. However, in their 
current form, cloud computing infrastructures and platforms do not employ standard methods 
of storing user data and applications. Consequently, they do not interoperate and user data are 
not portable. 
The answer to this concern is standardization. In this direction, there are efforts to create open 
standards for cloud computing. The Cloud Computing Interoperability Forum (CCIF) was 
formed by organizations such as Intel, Sun, and Cisco in order to “enable a global cloud 
computing ecosystem whereby organizations are able to seamlessly work together for the 
purposes for wider industry adoption of cloud computing technology.” The development of 
the Unified Cloud Interface (UCI) by CCIF aims at creating a standard programmatic point of 
access  to  an  entire  cloud  infrastructure.  In  the  hardware  virtualization  sphere,  the  Open 
Virtual Format (OVF) aims at facilitating packing and distribution of software to be run on 
VMs so that virtual appliances can be made portable—that is, seamlessly run on hypervisor 
of different vendors. 
Availability, Fault-Tolerance, and Disaster Recovery: It is expected that users willhave 
certain expectations about the service level to be provided once their applications are moved 
to the cloud. These expectations include availability of the service, its overall performance, 
and  what  measures  are  to  be  taken  when  something  goes  wrong  in  the  system  or  its 
components. In summary, users seek for a warranty before they can comfortably move their 
business to the cloud. SLAs, which include QoS requirements, must be ideally set up between 
customers and cloud computing providers to act as warranty. An SLA specifies the details of 
the service to be provided, including availability and performance guarantees. Additionally, 
metrics must be agreed upon by all parties, and penalties for violating the expectations must 
also be approved. 
Resource  Management  and  Energy-Efficiency:  One  important  challenge  faced  by 
providers of cloud computing services is the efficient management of virtualized resource 
pools. Physical resources such as CPU cores, disk space, and network bandwidth must be 
sliced and shared among virtual machines running potentially heterogeneous workloads. The 

 
  65 
multi-dimensional  nature  of  virtual  machines  complicates  the  activity  of  finding  a  good 
mapping of VMs onto available physical hosts while maximizing user utility. Dimensions to 
be  considered  include:  number  of  CPUs,  amount  of  memory,  size  of  virtual  disks,  and 
network bandwidth.  
Dynamic VM mapping policies may leverage the ability to suspend, migrate, and 
resume VMs as an easy way of preempting low-priority allocations in favor of higher-priority 
ones. Migration of VMs also brings additional challenges such as detecting when to initiate a 
migration,  which  VM  to  migrate,  and  where  to  migrate.  In  addition,  policies  may  take 
advantage  of  live  migration  of  virtual  machines  to  relocate  data  center  load  without 
significantly disrupting running services.  
In this case, an additional concern is the trade-off between the negative impact of a 
live migration on the performance and stability of a service and the benefits to be achieved 
with  that  migration.  Another  challenge  concerns  the  outstanding  amount  of  data  to  be 
managed in variousVM management activities. Such data amount is a result of particular 
abilities of virtual machines, including the ability of traveling through space (i.e., migration) 
and  time  (i.e.,  check  pointing  and  rewinding),  operations  that  may  be  required  in  load 
balancing, backup, and recovery scenarios. In addition, dynamic provisioning of new VMs 
and  replicating  existing  VMs  require  efficient  mechanisms  to  make  VM  block  storage 
devices (e.g., image files) quickly available at selected hosts. Data centers consumer large 
amounts of electricity. According to a data published byHP, 100 server racks can consume 
1.3MWof power and another 1.3 MW are required by the cooling system, thus costing USD 
2.6  million  per  year.  Besides  the  monetary  cost,  data  centers  significantly  impact  the 
environment in terms of CO2 emissions from the cooling systems 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
  66 
UNIT – IV 
Software as a Service (SAAS) & Data Security in the Cloud: Software as a  Service SAAS), 
Google App Engine – Centralizing Email Communications- Collaborating via Web- Based 
Communication Tools-An Introduction to the idea of Data Security. 
Software as a Service (SAAS) & Data Security in the Cloud 
Software as a Service(SAAS)
 
Traditional desktop applications such as word processing and spreadsheet can 
now be accessed as a service in the Web. This model of delivering applications, known 
as Software as a Service (SaaS), alleviates the burden of software maintenance for 
customers and simplifies development and testing for providers.
 
Salesforce.com, which relies on the SaaS model, offers business productivity 
applications  (CRM)  that  reside  completely  on  their  servers,  allowing  customers  to 
customize and access applications on demand.
 
 
Deployment Models
 
Although cloud computing has emerged mainly from the appearance of public 
computing utilities, other deployment models, with variations in physical location 
and distribution, have been adopted. In this sense, regardless of its service class, a 
cloud can be classified as public, private, community, or hybrid based on model of 

 
  67 
deployment as shown figure below.
 
 
 
 
Public cloud & Private cloud:  
Public cloud as a “cloud made available in a pay-as-you-go manner to the general 
public”. Private cloud as “internal data center of a business or other organization, not 
made available to the general public.”
 
 
    In  most  cases,  establishing  a  private  cloud  means  restructuring  an  existing 
infrastructure by adding virtualization and cloud-like interfaces. This allows users to 
interact with the local data center while experiencing the same advantages of public 
clouds, most notably self-service interface, privileged access to virtual servers, and 
per-usage metering and billing. 
 
    A community cloud is “shared by several organizations and supports a specific 
community that has shared concerns (e.g., mission, security requirements, policy, and 
compliance considerations).”
 
 
     A hybrid  cloud takes  shape  when  a  private  cloud  is  supplemented  with 
computing capacity from public clouds. The approach of temporarily renting capacity 
to handle spikes in load is known as “cloud-bursting”
 
DESIRED FEATURES OF A CLOUD 
Certain features of a cloud are essential to enable services that truly represent the 
cloud  computing model  and  satisfy  expectations  of  consumers,  and  cloud  offerings 
must be having following features: 
1. 
Self-service  
 

 
  68 
2. 
Per-usage metered and billed
 
3. 
Elastic, 
 
4. Customizable. 
 Self-Service 
Consumers of cloud computing services expect on-demand, nearly instant access 
to resources. To support this expectation, clouds must allow self-service access so that 
customers can request, customize, pay, and use services without intervention of human 
operators. 
 Per-Usage Metering and Billing 
Cloud computing eliminates up-front commitment by users, allowing them to 
request and use only the necessary amount. Services must be priced on a short- term 
basis (e.g., by the hour), allowing users to release (and not pay for) resources as soon as 
they  are  not  needed.  For  these  reasons,  clouds  must  implement  features  to  allow 
efficient trading of service such as pricing, accounting, and billing. Metering should be 
done  accordingly  for  different  types  of  service  (e.g.,  storage,  processing,  and 
bandwidth) and usage promptly reported, thus providing greater transparency. 
 Elasticity 
Cloud computing gives the illusion of infinite computing resources available on 
demand. Therefore, users expect clouds to rapidly provide resources in any quantity at 
any  time.  In  particular,  it  is  expected  that  the  additional  resources  can  be  (a) 
provisioned, possibly automatically, when an application load increases and (b) released 
when load decreases (scale up and down). 
 Customization 
In a multi-tenant cloud a great disparity between user needs is often the case. 
Thus, resources rented from the cloud must be  highly customizable. In the case of 
infrastructure  services,  customization  means  allowing  users  to  deploy  specialized 
virtual appliances and to be given privileged (root) access to the virtual servers. Other 
service classes (PaaS and SaaS) offer less flexibility and are not suitable for general-
purpose computing, but still are expected to provide a certain level of customization. 
Google APP Engine 
 
1. The  app  engine  is a  Cloud-based  platform,  is quite  comprehensive  and  combines 
infrastructure  as a  service  (IaaS), platform  as a service (PaaS) and software as a 
service  (SaaS).The  app  engine  supports  the  delivery,  testing  and  development  of 
software on demand in a Cloud computing environment that supports millions of users 
and is highly scalable. 
2. The company extends its platform and infrastructure to the Cloud through its app 
engine.  It  presents  the  platform to  those  who  want  to  develop  SaaS  solutions  at 
competitive costs. 

 
  69 
3. It is a platform for hosting web applications in Google managed data centers. It is 
cloud-computing technology which virtualizes  applications across multiple servers 
and data centers. Running your web application in Google infrastructure and Support 
different runtime environments 
 
 
Java (JRE 6 with limitation, Servlet 2.5, JDO, 
JPA) Python (2.5.2) 
1. Apps run in sandbox. 
2. Automatic scaling and load balancing 
3. No server restart, no network issues 
 
1. The SDC constructs an encrypted connection between the data source and Google 
Apps. As long as the data source is in the Google Apps domain to the Google tunnel 
protocol  servers,  when  the  user  wants  to  get  the  data,  he/she  will  first  send  an 
authorized data requests to Google Apps, which forwards the request to the tunnel 
server. 
2. The tunnel servers validate the request identity. If the identity is valid, the tunnel 
protocol allows the SDC to set up a connection, authenticate, and encrypt the data that 
flows across the Internet. At the same time, the SDC uses resource rules to validate 
whether a user is authorized to access a specified resource. 
3. When the request is valid, the SDC performs a network request. The server validates 
the signed request, checks the credentials, and returns the data if the user is authorized 
From the perspective of cloud storage services, data integrity depends on the security 
of  operations  while  in  storage  in  addition  to  the  security  of  the  uploading  and 
downloading sessions. The uploading session can only ensure that the data received 
by the cloud storage is the data that the user uploaded; The downloading session can 
guarantee  the  data  that  the  user  retrieved  is  the  data  cloud  storage  recorded. 
Unfortunately, this procedure applied on cloud storage services cannot guarantee data 
integrity.    First, assume that Alice, a company CFO, stores the company financial 
data  at  a  cloud  storage  service  provided  by  Eve.  And  then  Bob,  the  company 
administration chairman, downloads the data from the cloud. 
 There are three important concerns in this simple procedure: 

 
  70 
1. Confidentiality. Eve is considered as an untrustworthy third party, Alice and Bob do 
not want reveal the data to Eve. 
2. Integrity. As the administrator of the storage service, Eve has the capability to play 
with the data in hand. How can Bob be confident that the data he fetched from Eve are 
the same as what was sent by Alice? Are there any measures to guarantee that the data 
have not been tampered by Eve? 
3. Repudiation.  If  Bob  finds  that  the  data  have  been  tampered  with,  is  there  any 
evidence for him to demonstrate that it is Eve who should be responsible for the fault? 
Similarly, Eve also needs certain evidence to prove her innocence. 
GoogleAPP Engine Solutions for Missing Link 
1. Third Authority Certified(TAC) 
2. Secret Key Sharing(SKS) 
Four Solutions 
1. Neither TAC nor SKS 
2. With SKS but without TAC  
3.  With TAC but without SKS O With Both TAC and SKS 
 
Google is a leader in web-based applications, 
 
Google is a leader in web-based applications and leading searching engine in the world. so 
it’s not surprising that the company also offers cloud development services. 
1. These services come in the form of the Google App Engine, which enables 
developers  to  build  their  own  web  applications  utilizing  the  same 
infrastructure that powers Google’s powerful applications. 
2. The Google App Engine provides a fully integrated application environment. 
Using  Google’s  development  tools  and  computing  cloud,  App  Engine 
applications are easy to build, easy to maintain, and easy to scale. All you have 
to do 
Features of App Engine 
1. These are covered by the depreciation policy and the service-level agreement of the 
app  engine.  Any  changes  made  to  such  a  feature  are  backward-compatible  and 
implementation  of  such  a  feature  is  usually  stable.  These  include  data  storage, 
retrieval,  and  search;  communications;  process  management;  computation;  app 
configuration and management. 
2. Data  storage,  retrieval,  and  search  include  features  such  as  HRD  migration  tool, 
Google Cloud SQL, logs, datastore, dedicated Memcache, blobstore, Memcache and 
search. 
3. Communications  include  features  such  as  XMPP.  channel,  URL  fetch,  mail,  and 
Google Cloud Endpoints.  
4. Process  management  includes  features  like  scheduled  tasks  and  task  queue. 
Computation includes images.  

 
  71 
5. App  management  and  configuration  cover  app  identity,  users,  capabilities,  traffic 
splitting,  modules,  SSL  for  custom  domains,  modules,  remote  access,  and  multi-
tenancy. 
Centralizing email Communications 
 
1. The key here is to enable anywhere/anytime access to  email. Precloud computing, 
your  email  access  was  via  a  single  computer,  which  also  stored  all  your  email 
messages. 
2. For this purpose, you probably used a program like Microsoft Outlook or Outlook 
Express, installed on your home computer. 
3. To check your home email from work, it took a bit of juggling and perhaps the use of  
your  ISP’s  email  access  web  page.  That  web  page  was  never  in  sync  with  the 
messages on your home PC, of course, which is just the start of the problemswith 
trying to communicate in this fashion. 
4. A  better  approach  is  to  use  a  web-based  email  service,  such  as  Google’s  Gmail 
(mail.google.com), Microsoft’s  Windows Live Hotmail (mail.live.com), or Yahoo! 
Mail (mail.yahoo.com).  
5. These services place your email inbox in the cloud and you can access it from any 
computer connected to the Internet. 
Collaborating via Web-Based Communication Tools-GMAIL 
1. Gmail offers a few unique features that set it apart from the web-based email crowd. 
2. First,  Gmail  doesn’t  use  folders.  With  Gmail  you  can’t  organize  your  mail  into 
folders, as you can with the other services. 
3. Instead,  Gmail  pushes  the  search  paradigm  as  the  way  to  find the  messages  you 
want— not a surprise, given Google’s search-centric business model. 
4. Gmail does, however, let you “tag” each message with one or more labels. This has the 
effect of creating virtual folders, as you can search and sort your messages by any of 
their labels. 
5. In  addition,  Gmail  groups  together  related  email  messages  in  what  Google  calls 
conversationsYahoo! Mail Yahoo! Mail (mail.yahoo.com) 
6. There is another web mail service, provided by the popular Yahoo! search site. 
7. The basic Yahoo! Mail is free and can be accessed from any PC, using any web 
browser. 
8. Yahoo! also offers a paid service called Yahoo! Mail Plus that lets you send larger 
messages and offers offline access to your messages via POP email clients. 
Web Mail Services 
1. AOL Mail (mail.aol.com) 
2. BigString (www.bigstring.com)  
3. Excite Mail (mail.excite.com) 

 
  72 
4. FlashMail (www.flashmail.com) 
5. GMX Mail (www.gmx.com) 
6. Inbox.com (www.inbox.com) 
7. Lycos Mail (mail.lycos.com) 
8. Mail.com (www.mail.com) 
9. Zoho Mail (zoho.mail.com) 
An Introduction to Data Security: 
Data Security 
 
1. Data  Security  defines  as  Information  in  a  cloud  environment  has  much  more 
dynamism and fluidity than information that is static on a desktop or in a network 
folder 
2. Nature  of  cloud  computing  dictates  that  data  are  fluid  objects,  accessible  froma 
multitude of nodes and geographic locations and, as such, must have a datasecurity 
methodology  that  takes  this  into  account  while  ensuring  that  this  fluidity  is  not 
compromised.  
3. The idea of content-centric or information-centric protection, being an inherent part of 
a  data  object  is  a  development  out  of  the  idea  of  the  “de-perimerization”  of  the 
enterprise. 
4. This idea was put forward by a group of Chief Information Officers (CIOs) who 
formed an organization called the Jericho Forum 
TECHNOLOGIES FOR DATA SECURITY IN CLOUD COMPUTING 
Unique issues of the cloud data storage platform from a few different perspectives 
1. Database Outsourcing and Query Integrity Assurance 
I.  Storing data into and fetching data from devices and machines behind a cloud are essentially 
a novel form of database outsourcing 
 
2. Data Integrity in Untrustworthy Storage 
I. The fear of losing data or data corruption 
II. Relieve the users’ fear by providing technologies that enable users to check the 

 
  73 
integrity of their data 
 
3. Web-Application-Based Security 
I. Once the dataset is stored remotely, a Web browser is one of the most 
convenient approaches that end users can use to access their data on remote 
services 
II. Web security plays a more important role for cloud computing 
 
1. Multimedia Data Security 
1. With the development of high-speed network technologies and large 
bandwidth connections, more and more multimedia data are being stored 
and shared in cyber space 
2. The security requirements for video, audio, pictures, or images are 
different from other applications 
CLOUD COMPUTING AND IDENTITY 
Digital identity 
1. Digital identity holds the key to flexible data security within a cloud Environment 
2. A digital identity represents who we are and how we interact with others on-line. 
3. Access, identity, and risk are three variables that can become inherently connected 
when applied to the security of data, because access and risk are directly proportional: 
As access increases, so then risk to the security of the data increases. 
4. Access controlled by identifying the actor attempting the access is the most logical 
manner of performing this operation. 
5. Ultimately, digital identity holds the key to securing data, if that digital identity can be 
programmatically linked to security policies controlling the post-access usage of data. 
Identity, Reputation, and Trust 
1. Reputation is a real-world commodity; that is a basic requirement of human-to-human 
relationships 
2. Our basic societal communication structure is built upon the idea of reputation and 
trust. 
3. Reputation and its counter value, trust, is easily transferable to a digital realm: 
4. EBay, for example, having partly built a successful business model on the strength of 
a ratings system, builds up the reputation of its buyers and sellers through successful 
(or unsuccessful) transactions. 
5. These types of reputation systems can be extremely useful when used with a digital 
identity. 
6. They can be used to associate varying levels of trust with that identity, which in turn 
can be used to define the level (granular variations) of security policy applied to data 
resources that the individual wishes to access 

 
  74 
User-Centric Identity: 
1. Digital identities are a mechanism for identifying an individual, particularly within a 
cloud environment and identity ownership being placed upon the individual is known 
as user- centric identity 
2. It allows users to consent and control how their identity (and the individual identifiers 
making up the identity, the claims) is used. 
3. This  reversal  of  ownership  away  from  centrally  managed  identity  platforms 
(enterprise- centric) has many advantages. 
4. This includes the potential to improve the privacy aspects of a digital identity, by 
giving an individual the ability to apply permission policies based on their identity and 
to control which aspects of that identity are divulged 
5. An identity may be controllable by the end user, to the extent that the user can then 
decide what information is given to the party relying on the identity 
Information Card: 
 Information cards permit a user to present to a Web site or other service (relying 
party) one or more claims, in the form of a software token, which may be used to 
uniquely identify that user. 
 They can be used in place of user name/ passwords, digital certificates, and other 
identification systems, when user identity needs to be established to control access to 
a Web site or other resource, or to permit digital signing 
 Information cards are part of an identity meta-system consisting of: 
 Identity  providers  (IdP),  who  provision  and  manage  information  cards  with 
specific claims, to users. 
 Users who  own  and  utilize  the  cards  to  gain  access  to  Web  sites  and  other 
resources that support information cards. 
 An identity selector/service, which is a piece of software on the user’s desktop or 
in the cloud that allows a user to select and manage their  cards. 
 Relying parties. These are the applications, services & so on, that can use  an 
information card to authenticate a person and to then authorize an action such as 
logging onto a Web site, accessing a document, signing content, and so on. 
 Each information card is associated with a set of claims which can be used to 
identify the user. These claims include identifiers such as name, email address 
post code. 
Using Information Cards to Protect Data 
 
1. Information cards are built around a set of open standards devised by a consortium 
that includes Microsoft, IBM, Novell, and so on. 
2. The original remit of the cards was to create a type of single sign on system for the 
Internet, to help users to move away from the need to remember multiple passwords. 

 
  75 
3. However, the information card system can be used in many more ways. 
4. Because an information card is a type of digital identity, it can be used in the same 
way that other digital identities can be used. 
5. For example, an information card can be used to digitally sign data and content and to 
control  access  to  data  and  content.  One  of  the  more  sophisticated  uses  of  an 
information card is the advantage given to the cards by way of the claims system. 
 
Cloud Computing and Data Security Risk 
 
1. Cloud computing is a development that is meant to allow more open accessibility and 
easier and improved data sharing. 
2. Data are uploaded into a cloud and stored in a data center, for access by users from 
that data center; or in a more fully cloud-based model, the data themselves are created 
in the cloud and stored and accessed from the cloud (again via a data center). 
3. The most obvious risk in this scenario is that associated with the storage of that data. 
A user uploading or creating cloud-based data include those data that are stored and 
maintained by a third-party cloud provider such as Google, Amazon, Microsoft, and 
so on. 
This action has several risks associated with it: 
i. Firstly, it is necessary to protect the data during upload into the data center to 
ensure that the data do not get hijacked on the way into the database. 
ii. Secondly, it is necessary to the stores the data in the data center to ensure that they 
are encrypted at all times. 
iii. Thirdly, and perhaps less obvious, the access to those data need to be controlled; 
this control should also be applied to the hosting company, including the 
administrators of the data center. 
iv. In addition, an area often forgotten in the application of security to a data resource 
is the protection of that resource during its use 
Data security risks are compounded by the open nature of cloud computing. 
1. Access control becomes a much more fundamental issue in cloud-based systems 
because of the accessibility of the data 
2. Information-centric access control (as opposed to access control lists) can help to 
balance improved accessibility with risk, by associating access rules with different 
data objects within an open and accessible platform, without losing the Inherent 
usability of that platform 
3. A further area of risk associated not only with cloud computing, but also with 
traditional network computing, is the use of content after access. 

 
  76 
4. The risk is potentially higher in a cloud network, for the simple reason that the 
information is outside of your corporate walls 
Data-centric mashups 
1. that are used to perform business processes around data creation and dissemination—
by their very nature, can be used to hijack  data, leaking sensitive information and/or 
affecting integrity of that data 
2. Cloud computing, more than any other form of digital communication technology, 
has created a need to ensure that protection is applied at the inception of the 
information, in a content centric manner, ensuring that a security policy becomes an 
integral part of that data throughout its life cycle. 
Encryption 
 
1. It is a vital component of the protection policy, but further controls over the access of 
that data and on the use of the data must be met. 
2. In the case of mashups, the controlling of access to data resources, can help toalleviate 
the security concerns by ensuring that mashup access is authenticated. 
3. Linking security policies, as applied to the use of content, to the access control 
method offer a way of continuing protection of data, post access and throughout the 
life cycle; this type of data security philosophy must be incorporated into the use of 
cloud computing to alleviate security risks. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT- V 

 
  77 
SLA Management in cloud computing: Traditional Approaches to SLO Management, Types 
of SLA, Life Cycle of SLA, SLA Management in Cloud. 
SLA MANAGEMENT IN CLOUD COMPUTING 
In the early days of web-application deployment, performance of the application at 
peak load was a single important criterion for provisioning server resources. Provisioning in 
those days involved deciding hardware configuration, determining the number of physical 
machines,  and  acquiring  them  upfront  so  that  the  overall  business  objectives  could  be 
achieved. The web applications were hosted on these dedicated individual servers within 
enterprises’ own server rooms. These web applications were used to provide different kinds 
of  e-services  to  various  clients.  Typically,  the  service-level  objectives  (SLOs)  for  these 
applications were response time and throughput of the application end-user requests. The 
capacity buildup was to cater to the estimated peak load experienced by the application. The 
activity of determining the number of servers and their capacity that could satisfactorily serve 
the  application  end-user  requests  at  peak  loads  is  called  capacity  planning.  An  example 
scenario  where  two  web  applications,  application  A  and  application  B,  are  hosted  on  a 
separate set of dedicated servers within the enterprise-owned server rooms is shown in Figure 
16.1. The planned capacity for each of the applications to run successfully is three servers. As 
the number of web applications grew, the server rooms in the organization became large and 
such server rooms were known as data centers. These data centers were owned and managed 
by the enterprises themselves. 
 
 

 
  78 
 
TRADITIONAL APPROACHES TO SLO MANAGEMENT 
Traditionally, load balancing techniques and admission control mechanisms have been used 
to  provide  guaranteed  quality  of  service  (QoS)  for  hosted  web  applications.  These 
mechanisms can be viewed as the first attempt towards managing the SLOs. In the following 
subsections we discuss the existing approaches for load balancing and admission control for 
ensuring QoS. 
     Load  Balancing  The  objective  of  a  load  balancing  is  to  distribute  the  incoming 
requests onto a set of physical machines, each hosting a replica of an application, so that the 
load on the machines is equally distributed. The load balancing algorithm executes on a 
physical machine that interfaces with the clients. This physical machine, also called the front- 
end node, receives the incoming requests and distributes these requests to different physical 
machines for further execution. 
This set of physical machines is responsible for serving the incoming requests and are known 
as the back-end nodes. 
TYPES OF SLA: 
 Service-level agreement provides a framework within which both seller and buyer of 
a  service  can  pursue  a  profitable  service  business  relationship.  It  outlines  the  broad 
understanding between the service provider and the service consumer for conducting business 
and  forms  the  basis  for  maintaining  a  mutually  beneficial  relationship.  From  a  legal 
perspective, the necessary terms and conditions that bind the service provider to provide 
services continually to the service consumer are formally defined in SLA. 
     SLA  can  be  modeled  using  web  service-level  agreement  (WSLA)  language 
specification. Although WSLA is intended for web-service-based applications, it is equally 
applicable  for  hosting  of  applications.  Service-level  parameter,  metric,  function, 
measurement  directive,  service-level  objective,  and  penalty  are  some  of  the  important 
components of WSLA and are described in Table 16.1. 
 

 
  79 
There are two types of SLAs from the perspective of application hosting. These are described 
in detail here. 
Infrastructure  SLA:  The  infrastructure  provider  manages  and  offers  guarantees  on 
availability of the infrastructure, namely, server machine, power, network connectivity, and 
so on. Enterprises manage themselves, their applications that are deployed on these server 
machines. The machines are leased to the customers and are isolated from machines of other 
customers.  In  such  dedicated  hosting  environments,  a  practical  example  of  service-level 
guarantees offered by infrastructure providers is shown in Table 16.2. 
 
Application  SLA:  In  the  application  co-location  hosting  model,  the  server  capacity  is 
available  to  the  applications  based  solely  on their resource demands.  Hence,  the service 
providers are flexible in allocating and de-allocating computing resources among the co- 
located applications. 
Therefore, the service providers are also responsible for ensuring to meet their customer’s 
application SLOs. For example, an enterprise can have the following application SLA with a 
service provider for one of its application.  
LIFE CYCLE OF SLA: 
Each  SLA  goes  through  a  sequence  of  steps  starting  from  identification  of  terms  and 
conditions,  activation  and  monitoring  of  the  stated  terms  and  conditions,  and  eventual 
termination of contract once the hosting relationship ceases to exist. Such a sequence of steps 
is called SLA life cycle and consists of the following five phases: 
1. Contract definition 
2. Publishing and discovery 
3. Negotiation 
4. Operationalization 
5. De-commissioning 
Here, we explain in detail each of these phases of SLA life cycle. 
Contract  Definition:  Generally,  service  providers  define  a  set  of  service  offerings  and 
corresponding  SLAs  using  standard  templates.  These  service  offerings  form  a  catalog. 
Individual SLAs for enterprises can be derived by customizing these base SLA templates. 
Publication and Discovery: Service provider advertises these base service offerings through 
standard publication media, and the customers should be able to locate the service provider 
by  searching  the  catalog.  The  customers  can  search  different  competitive  offerings  and 
shortlist a few that fulfill their requirements for further negotiation. 
Negotiation:  Once  the  customer  has  discovered  a  service  provider  who  can  meet  their 
application hosting need, the SLA terms and conditions needs to be mutually agreed upon 
before signing the agreement for hosting the application. For a standard packaged application 

 
  80 
which is offered as service, this phase could be automated. For customized applications that 
are hosted on cloud platforms, this phase is manual. The service provider needs to analyze the 
application’s behavior with respect to scalability and performance before agreeing on the 
specification of SLA. At the end of this phase, the SLA is mutually agreed by both customer 
and provider and is eventually signed off. SLA negotiation can utilize the WS-negotiation 
specification. 
Operationalization: SLA operation consists of SLA monitoring, SLA accounting, and SLA 
enforcement.  SLA  monitoring  involves  measuring  parameter  values  and  calculating  the 
metrics  defined  as  a  part  of  SLA  and  determining  the  deviations.  On  identifying  the 
deviations,  the  concerned  parties  are  notified.  SLA  accounting  involves  capturing  and 
archiving the SLA adherence for compliance. 
     As  part  of  accounting,  the  application’s  actual  performance  and  the  performance 
guaranteed as a part of SLA is reported. Apart from the frequency and the duration of the 
SLA  breach,  it  should  also  provide  the  penalties  paid  for  each  SLA  violation.  SLA 
enforcement involves taking appropriate action when the runtime monitoring detects a SLA 
violation.  Such  actions  could  be  notifying  the  concerned  parties,  charging  the  penalties 
besides other things. The different policies can be expressed using a subset of the Common 
Information Model (CIM) [9]. The CIM model is an open standard that allows expressing 
managed elements of data center via relationships and common objects. 
De-commissioning: SLA decommissioning involves termination of all activities performed 
under a particular SLA when the hosting relationship between the service provider and the 
service consumer has ended. SLA specifies the terms and conditions of contract termination 
and specifies situations under which the relationship between a service provider and a service 
consumer can be considered to be legally ended. 
SLA  MANAGEMENT  IN CLOUD:  SLA management of  applications hosted on  cloud 
platforms involves five phases. 
1. Feasibility 
2. On-boarding 
3. Pre-production 
4. Production 
5. Termination 
Different activities performed under each of these phases are shown in Figure 16.7. These 
activities are explained in detail in the following subsections. 
Feasibility Analysis: 
MSP conducts the feasibility study of hosting an application on their cloud platforms. This 
study involves three kinds of feasibility: (1) technical feasibility, (2) infrastructure feasibility, 
and (3) financial feasibility. The technical feasibility of an application implies determining 
the following: 

 
  81 
1. Ability of an application to scale out. 
2. Compatibility of the application with the cloud platform being used within the MSP’s data 
center. 
3. The need and availability of a specific hardware and software required for hosting and 
running of the application. 
4. Preliminary information about the application performance and whether they can be met by 
the MSP.  
  

 
  82 
  
On-Boarding of Application 
Once  the customer and the MSP  agree in principle to host the application based on  the 
findings of the feasibility study, the application is moved from the customer servers to the 
hosting platform. Moving an application to the MSP’s hosting platform is called on-boarding. 
As  part  of  the  on-boarding  activity,  the  MSP  understands  the  application  runtime 
characteristics using runtime profilers. This helps the MSP to identify the possible SLAs that 
can  be  offered  to  the  customer  for  that  application.  This  also  helps  in  creation  of  the 
necessary policies (also called rule sets) required to guarantee the SLOs mentioned in the 

 
  83 
application SLA. The application is accessible to its end users only after the on-boarding 
activity is completed. 
 
Preproduction 
Once  the  determination  of  policies  is  completed  as  discussed  in  previous  phase,  the 
application is hosted in a simulated production environment. It facilitates the customer to 
verify and validate the MSP’s findings on application’s runtime characteristics and agree on 
the defined SLA. Once both parties agree on the cost and the terms and conditions of the 
SLA, the customer sign-off is obtained. On successful completion of this phase the MSP 
allows the application to go on-live. 
 
Production 
In this phase, the application is made accessible to its end users under the agreed SLA. 
However, there could be situations when the managed application tends to behave differently 
in a production environment compared to the preproduction environment. This in turn may 
cause sustained breach of the terms and conditions mentioned in the SLA. Additionally, 
customer may request the MSP for inclusion of new terms and conditions in the SLA. If the 
application SLA is breached frequently or if the customer requests for a new non-agreed 
SLA, the on-boarding process is performed again. In the case of the former, on-boarding 
activity is repeated to analyze the application and its policies with respect to SLA fulfillment. 
In  case  of  the  latter,  a  new  set  of  policies  are  formulated  to  meet  the  fresh  terms  and 
conditions of the SLA. 
 
Termination 
When the customer wishes to withdraw the hosted application and does not wish to continue 
to avail the services of the MSP for managing the hosting of its application, the termination 
activity  is  initiated.  On  initiation  of  termination,  all  data  related  to  the  application  are 
transferred  to  the  customer  and  only  the  essential  information  is  retained  for  legal 
compliance. This ends the hosting relationship between the two parties for that application, 
and the customer sign-off is obtained. 
 