

APPROACHES TO 
ADDRESSING GENDER 
INEQUALITIES
There are two approaches to addressing gender inequalities;  
a. Women in Development(WID)
b. Gender and Development(GAD)
1

WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT(WID)
WID is an approach to development which focuses on women and their specific 
situation as a separate group. WID projects frequently involve only women as 
participants.`
The approach was developed from a book written by Ester Boserup  which was 
written in 1970. The book talked about women’s role in economic development. It 
demonstrated that women made important contributions , which were ignored by 
government.
WID aimed at more efficient and effective development through incorporating 
women specific projects into the existing development process. It was thought that 
development projects would become more efficient by decreasing women’s 
reproductive workload or increasing their productive efficiency.
WID is acknowledged for addressing the practical gender needs.( these are related to 
the conditions of women for an effective execution of their traditional gender roles).
2

WID AND ITS APPROACHES
i.WELFARE APPROACH: Women were  targeted as mothers and wives 
and it was assumed that macro economic growth will trickle down to 
have economic benefits for the poor and that economic prosperity of their 
husbands and fathers will positively improve the status of women thus it 
ignored women as economic actors.
ii.THE EFFICIENCY APPROACH: This approach focused on women as 
largely economic actors and producers and ignored their reproductive 
lives. It as criticized for focusing on women’s role in development rather 
development’s role for women. 
iii.THE EMPOWERMENT APPROACH: This  approach called for 
working with women at grassroot level to exercise their agency in 
deciding for their development.
3

WID AND ITS APPROACHES...........
iv. MAINSTREAMING GENDER EQUALITY APPROACH: This 
approach claims to combine the strengths of the efficiency and 
empowerment approach. It calls for the integration of concerns and 
experiences of women and men in all stages of development.
v. THE EQUITY APPROACH
This  approach combines concerns about equity and efficiency. The 
approach had a lasting impact on how development planners consider 
women. The equity approach points out that women and men do not 
benefit equally from economic development. According to the equity  
approach, economic growth has negative impacts on women.
4

WID AND ITS APPROACHES...
v. THE ANTI-POVERTY APPROACH: This approach was needed 
as women’s ‘women’ only focus for equal rights in the equity approach 
was meeting resistance and the interests of women had to be located 
within the general direction of development. The focus of this approach 
was meeting people’s basic needs. Women’s practical gender needs were 
stressed while the strategic gender needs were sidelined 
5

GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT(GAD)
•It is an approach that is concerned  with how the society assigns roles, 
responsibilities and expectations to both men and women.
•GAD  was developed in 1980s as an alternative to the WID Approach. 
Unlike WID , the GAD approach is not concerned specifically with 
women, but with how a society assigns roles, responsibilities and 
expectations to both men and women. 
•GAD focuses primarily on two major frameworks; Gender Roles and 
Social Relations Analysis.
•Gender roles: This analysis focuses on the social construction of identities within the 
household. It reveals expectations from males and females in their relative access to 
resources.
6

GENDER AND DEVELOPMENT(GAD)
•Social relations: This analysis exposes the social dimensions of 
hierarchical power relations embedded in social institutions.
•It’s a determining influence on the relative position of men and women 
in society.
•In an attempt to create gender equality, ( denoting women having 
similar opportunities as men, including the ability to participate in the  
public sphere) GAD aims to redefine traditional gender role 
expectations. 
7