

Introduction to 
Databases 
HoweTOComputing 

Knowledge Review 
Can you write a question for this answer ? 

History of a Database 
▪Databases are not a new invention, they have existed for 
thousands of years.
▪Ancient cultures collected information about populations, 
trade records, taxes etc...
▪In 1086 William the Conqueror commissioned a complete 
catalogue of everything in the country.  Every piece of land, 
every man, woman, child, even the animals they owned.
▪It was called the Doomsday book, meaning ‘judgement day’.

Data vs Information 
What does the word data mean?
▪Data is unorganised raw facts that need processing 
without which it is seemingly random and useless to 
humans. 
▪Information is a processed, 
organised data presented 
in a given context and is 
useful to humans. 

Databases 
▪The world uses and needed to keep large amounts 
of data. A company will store data about its 
customers and staff, schools store data about the 
students, hospitals hold data on patients, 
supermarkets store data about stock levels and 
customer buying patterns.
▪In most cases, this data is stored on electronic 
databases.  These allow the data to be analysed so 
that patterns and trends can be found.

Data types 
▪Different types of data are represented in different ways inside a 
computer and need varying amounts of memory to store them.
Data type Definition Example 
StringA collection of alphanumeric characters 
(e.g. letters, numbers, symbols) 
Hello World 
Integer A whole number 55
Real A Decimal number 0.78
Boolean True or False True
Char A single character of alphanumeric 
characters
M

Database  key terms 
▪A single item of data is stored in a named FIELD 
▪A complete set of fields makes up a RECORD
▪All the records are stored in a TABLE or ‘ENTITY’ 
▪One or more tables then make up the database FILE

Database  key terms 
▪A database uses a primary key as a unique identifier 
for each record in the table. It is usually a field that 
is guaranteed to hold unique information for each 
recorded. 

Database  key terms 
▪Some data within the table is repeated over and over 
again.
▪Repeated data in a database is generally considered 
a bad thing. As It wastes space in the database and it 
takes time to input, typing the same data over and 
over which could leads to mistakes within the data. 
This is know as Data redundancy.
▪The solution is to split the data, the repeating data is 
removed from the main table, and placed in a table 
of its own to create a relational database. 

Database  key terms 
One table Student (contains data directly related to 
students) and one table for Class (contains data directly 
related to classes).
Both tables are independent, and each one has its own 
primary key.
This has lead to no repeating-data so no data 
redundancy within the Database.   

Relational databases key terms  
▪Relational databasesallow data to be stored in a 
clear, organised manner across multiple tables. Links, 
known as relationships, are formed to allow the data 
to be shared across the tables.
▪An ‘Entity’ is a group of closely related items about a 
subject 
▪Foreign keyis a link to a primary key on another 
table in a relational database table. 

Relational databases key terms  
▪Relational databasesallow data to be stored in a 
clear, organised manner across multiple tables. Links, 
known as relationships, are formed to allow the data 
to be shared across the tables.
▪An ‘Entity’ is a group of closely related items about a 
subject 
▪Foreign keyis a link to a primary key on another 
table in a relational database table. 

Database Relationships  
Relationship within a database is the link between the 
tables. There are three relationships:
▪One to one -e.g. One employee belongs to one 
organization or One person has one passport
▪One to many  -One customer to lots of products 
▪Many to many -students and classes

Revision Notes
Open the Database revision 
notes and complete the each 
section with your own notes 
and work examples.  
Answers:
1.Primary keys
RunValuseID
RunID
Foreign Key:
RunID
2. One to Many
3. Increase in database size
Increase in data corruption
Possible data inconsistency
Increase in cost

Additional reading and useful links
▪https://www.bbc.co.uk/bitesize/guides/zfd2fg8/revision/1
▪https://www.computerscience.gcse.guru/theory/what-is-a-database
▪https://www.teach-ict.com/gcse_new/databases/terminology/miniweb/index.htm
▪https://isaaccomputerscience.org/topics/databases

Exam Question 

SQL injection is a code injection technique that might destroy your 
database.
https://www.guru99.com/learn-sql-injection-with-practical-example.html