

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
DRAFT PHYSICS II MODULE 
 
By 
 
Thomas Nyanda Reuben, PhD 
and 
Duncan Nkolokosa Elia, MSc 
 
 
Note:  This  module  is  under  development  and  must  be  used  for  LUANAR  ODL 
purposes only unless permission is sought from the LUANAR ODL Coordinator 

 
1 
 
Module Objectives 
 
By the end of the module, you should be able to: 
 
1) Acquire  knowledge on  fluids,  heat  transfer,  simple  machines,  simple  harmonic 
motion, work, power and energy, electricity, light and optics  
2) Relate concepts of fluid statics and dynamics to design and evaluation of hydraulic 
structures 
3) Relate concepts of heat transfer, simple machines, simple harmonic motion, work, 
power and energy, electricity, light and optics to design, operation and evaluation 
of agricultural and natural resource equipment and instruments 
 

 
2 
 
UNIT 1: Fluid Mechanics 
 
1.0 Introduction 
Welcome  to Unit  1!!! In  this  unit  we  will  discuss  the  properties  of  fluids  and  their 
application  to design  of  hydraulic  structures. You  will  agree  that  our  day  to  day  lives 
depend on and deal with fluids. Before we proceed, let us remind each other what fluids 
are. McDonough  (2009)  defined  a  fluid  as  a  substance  that  will  undergo  continuous 
deformation when it is subjected to shear stress regardless of how small the shear stress is. 
We can, alternatively simply define a fluid as any substance that has the capability to flow 
and occupy the shape of a container in which it is placed. There are two groups of fluids, 
namely, gases and liquids. The air (gas) that we breathe and the water (liquid) that we use 
day  after day  are examples of fluids. Our discussion in this unit will cover the nature of 
fluids at rest (statics) and in motion (dynamics). 
 
 1.1. Objectives 
By the end of this unit you should be able to: 
 Define fluid concepts  
 Differentiate one fluid concept from another 
 Solve and analyze real-life problems related to fluids 
 Relate fluid concepts to design of hydraulic structures and equipment 
 
Key terms 
Ensure that you understand the key terms or phrases used in this unit as listed below. 
 Absolute viscosity 
 Buoyancy 
 Capillarity 
 Critical velocity 
 Density 
 Energy head 
 Fluid dynamics 
 Fluid mechanics 
 Fluid statics 
 Fluid viscosity 

 
2 
 
 Head loss 
 Ideal fluids 
 Kinematic viscosity 
 
 Kinetic energy 
 Laminar flow 
 Newtonian fluids 
 Potential energy 
 Pressure 
 Reynolds number 
 Specific gravity 
 Specific weight 
 Steady flow 
 Surface tension 
 Turbulent flow 
 Uniform flow 
 Velocity head 
 
1.2 Fluid Mechanics 
We will start our discussion by talking about fluid mechanics. Fluid mechanics represents 
a branch of applied mechanics that deals with the behaviour of fluids at rest (statics) and 
in motion (dynamics). In general fluids cover the liquid and gaseous state of matter. Fluids 
are substances that are capable of flowing and conform to the shape of vessels containing 
them. Let us look at other properties of fluids are presented below. 
1) Fluids cannot sustain tangential or shear forces when in equilibrium. 
2) All fluids have some degree of compressibility and offer little resistance to change 
of form. 
We can classify fluids as liquids or gases. The chief differences between liquids and gases 
are: 
1) Liquids are practically incompressible 
2) Gases are compressible and usually must be so treated 
3) Liquids occupy definite volumes and have free surfaces whereas a given mass of 
gas expands until it occupies all portions of any containing vessel. 
 
1.3 Properties of Fluids 
 
We  will  now  discuss  different  fluid  properties  in  order  to  further  our  understanding  of 
fluids. The properties include specific weight, density, specific gravity and viscosity. 

 
2 
 
 
1.3.1 Specific weight () 
The specific weight ( or w) of a substance is the weight of a unit volume of the substance. 
For  liquids,  may  be  taken  as  constant  for  practical  changes  of  pressure. The  specific 
weight of water for ordinary temperature variations is 9.79 kN/m
3
. 
 
We can calculate the specific weight of a gas using the equation of state which reads 
 
 1.1 
 
 
Where pressure p is absolute pressure, v is the volume per unit weight, temperature T is 
the absolute temperature, n the number of moles and R is the gas constant of a particular 
gas species: 
   
 1.2 
 
 
Since an inverse relationship exists between the gas’ specific weight and volume, i.e.   = 
1/v, then,   
 
 1.3 
 
 
 
 
1.3.2 Density of a Fluid or Body 
 

 
3 
 
We define the density of a given fluid or a body as its mass (m) per unit volume (v). We 
can  similarly  define  it  as  the  specific  weight  ()  of  the fluid or  body divided  by  the 
acceleration due to gravity (g) since /g = W/vg = mg/vg = m/g. Thus, 
 
    1.1 
 
In SI units, the density of water is 1000kg/m
3
 at 4°C.  
 
1.3.3 Specific gravity of a body 
 
The specific gravity of a body is the dimensionless ratio of the weight of the body to the 
weight of an equal volume of a substance taken as a standard. Solids and liquids are referred 
to water (20°C) as their standard while gases are often referred to air free of carbon dioxide 
or hydrogen (0°C). 
 
 1.2 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Thus if the specific gravity of a given oil is 0.750, its specific weight is (0.750)(9.79kN/m
3
) 
= 7.34kN/m
3
. 
 
1.3.4 Viscosity of a fluid 
 

 
4 
 
Viscosity is due primarily to interaction between fluid molecules. The viscosity of a fluid 
is that property which determines the amount of its resistance to a shearing force. The shear 
force required to move the particle in relation to one another depends on the type of liquid 
and  upon  its  temperature. The  shear  force of  a  given  fluid is  measured  in  terms  of  the 
Viscosity of the fluid. A gas has a very low viscosity while that of a liquid is higher. The 
viscosity  of  a  liquid  will  increase  as  its  temperature  is  reduced. Referring  to  the  figure 
below, consider two large, parallel plates a small distance y apart, the space between the 
plates being filled with a fluid. To keep the upper late moving at a constant velocity U, it 
is  found  that  a  constant  force  F  must  be  applied. Thus  there  exists a  viscous  interaction 
between the plate and fluid manifested by a drag on the former and a shear force on the 
latter. 
 
 
 
 
The fluid in contact with the upper plate will adhere to it and will move at velocity U, and 
the fluid in contact with the fixed plate will have velocity zero. If distance y and velocity 
U are not too great, the velocity profile will be a straight line. Experiments have shown that 
shear  force  F  varies  with  the  area  of  the  plate  A,  with  velocity  U,  and inversely  with 
distance y.  Since by similar triangles, U/y = dV/dy, we have: 
 
 1.3 
 
Where  = F/A = shear stress. 

 
5 
 
 
If a proportionality constant, , called the absolute (dynamic) viscosity, is introduced, 
 
 
 1.4 
 
 
It  follows  that  the  units  of  are  Pa-s. Fluids  for  which  the  proportionality  of  the  above 
equation  holds  are  called Newtonian  fluids.The  above  expression  was  postulated  by 
Newton and is known as Newton’s equation of viscosity.An Ideal or perfect fluid is one 
which  there  are  no  tangential  or  shear  stresses  between  the  fluid  particles. The  forces 
always  act  normally  at  a  section  and  are  limited  to  pressure  and  accelerative  forces. No 
real fluid fully complies with this concept, and for all fluids in motion there are tangential 
stresses  present  which  have  a  dampening  effect  on  the  motion. However,  some  liquids, 
including  water,  are  near  to  an  ideal  fluid,  and  this  simplifying  assumption  enables 
mathematical or graphical methods to be adopted in the solution of certain flow problems. 
 
 
 
Figure 1. Relationship between shearing 
 

 
6 
 
 
Another viscosity coefficient, the coefficient of kinematic viscosity, is defined as  
 
  
 
 
 1.5 
 
 
 
The units of  are m
2
/s. 
 
 
1.4 Fluid statics 
 
As  we  saw  earlier  on,  fluid  statics  deals  with  the  understanding  and  application  of 
properties of fluids at rest. In this section we will fluid pressure, surface tension, capillarity, 
and buoyancy and floatation. 
 
1.4.1 Pressure 
We can define pressure as the perpendicular force per unit area. The pressure exerted on or 
by a fluid is thus a force exerted at right angles to a unit area of surface in contact with the 
fluid. Pressure exerted by a fluid varies directly with depth. Fluid pressure is transmitted 
with equal intensity in all directions and acts normal to any plane.  
 
Having defined what pressure is, let us now look at Pascal’s Principle. Pascal’s principle 
states that “when the pressure on any part of a confined fluid is changed, the pressure 
on  every  part  of  the  fluid  is  also  changed  by  the  same  amount”. For  conditions  where 
force F is uniformly distributed over an area, we have 
 

 
7 
 
 1.6 
 
 
 
Figure 2. Pressure exerted by a column of fluid 
 
The difference in pressure between any two points at different levels in a liquid is given by 
the following equation: 
 
 1.7 
 
 
where  = Specific weight of the liquid and h
2
 – h
1 
= difference in elevation. 
 
If point 1 is in the free surface of the liquid and h is positive downward, the above equation 
becomes
  
 
 1.8 
 
 
We can apply these equations as long as long as  is constant (or varies so slightly with h 
as to cause no significant error in the result). In the context of pressure, we use the term 
vacuum to  refer  to  a  space  that  has  a  pressure  less  than  the  atmospheric  pressure. 

 
8 
 
Atmospheric  pressure  refers  to  the  prevailing  pressure  in  the  air  around  us. It  varies 
somewhat with changing weather conditions, and it decreases with increasing altitude.  
 
The average atmospheric pressure that you would experience at sea level is 101.3kPa, or 
760mm of mercury, or 1 atmosphere.  We commonly call this the “standard atmospheric 
pressure”. Now, you may have come across the term “vacuum”. We can quantify a vacuum 
in terms of how much its pressure is below atmospheric pressure. For example, if we pump 
air out  of  a  pressure  vessel  until  the  internal  pressure  is 68.9kPa,  and  if  atmospheric 
pressure  is  standard  (i.e.  101.3kPa), we  could  indicate the  pressure  in  the  vessel  as  a 
vacuum of 101.3kPa – 68.9 which is equal to 32.4kPa. 
 
We generally  indicate pressure  measurements as  either absolute  pressure or gauge 
pressure. Absolute pressure uses absolute zero, which is the lowest possible pressure and 
the  pressure  that  would  exist  in  a  perfect  vacuum,  as  its  base  (i.e.  zero  reading). Gauge 
pressure is measured with atmospheric pressure as its base. 
 
Thus  if  a  fluid  pressure  is  5.5kPa  above  standard  atmospheric  pressure  (101.3kPa),  its 
gauge pressure would be 5.5kPa and we can find its absolute pressure as 5.5 + 101.3, or 
106.8kPa. Sometimes absolute and gauge pressures are indicated by appending “a” and “g”, 
respectively, to the pressure units. 
 
Note: If no “a” or “g” (or other indication) is given, pressure is usually gauge pressure. 
 
 
1.4.1.1 Vapour Pressure 
 
When evaporation takes place within an enclosed space, the partial pressure created by the 
vapour  molecules  is  called vapour  pressure. Vapour  pressure depends upon  temperature 
and increases with it. 
 
 

 
9 
 
1.4.1.2 Hydrostatic Pressure 
 
We can define hydrostatic pressure as pressure due to a column of fluid height h and density 
ρ and represent this mathematically as: 
  
 1.9 
 
1.4.2 Surface Tension and Capillarity 
 
1.4.2.1 Surface Tension 
 
We need to note that a molecule in the interior of a liquid is under attractive forces in all 
directions and the vector sum of these forces is zero. A molecule at the surface of a liquid 
is acted upon by a net inward cohesive force that is perpendicular to the surface. 
 
1.4.2.2 Capillarity 
 
You might have observed that a liquid can rise or fall in a capillary tube (thin tube or porous 
medium such as the soil). This rise or fall of the liquid is caused by surface tension and 
depends on the relative magnitudes of the cohesion of the liquid and the adhesion of the 
liquid  to  the  walls  of  the  containing  vessel. Liquids  rise  in  tubes  they  wet  (adhesion  > 
cohesion) and fall in tubes they do not wet (cohesion > adhesion). We can illustrate these 
phenomena using Figure 3 (a) and (b).   
 

 
10 
 
 
Figure 3. An illustration of capillarity 
 
1.4.3 Buoyancy and Floatation 
 
It  is  worthy  for  us  to  note  that  the basic  principle  of  buoyancy  and  floatation  was  first 
discovered  and  stated  by  Archimedes  over  2200  years  ago. We  can  state Archimedes 
principle as follows:  
 
A body floating or submerged in a fluid is buoyed (lifted) upward by a force equal to the 
weight of the fluid that would be in the volume displaced by the body  
 
or 
 
If a body floats, or is submerged, in a liquid, the liquid exerts an up thrust on the body 
equal to the gravitational force on the liquid displaced by the body. 
 
The  force  that  the  liquid  exerts  on  the  body  is known  as  the buoyant  force. The  point 
through which the buoyant force acts is called the centre of buoyancy and is located at the 
centre of gravity of the displaced fluid. 
 
 

 
11 
 
By applying Archimedes’ principle, we can find volumes of irregular solids by determining 
the apparent loss of weight when a body is wholly immersed in a liquid of known specific 
gravity. 
 
1.5 Fluid Flow 
 
We have all encountered or seen fluids flowing through a given stream channel or pipeline. 
We can characterize fluid flow as 
1) Steady or unsteady;  
2) Uniform or non-uniform; 
3) Laminar or turbulent; 
4) One-dimensional, two-dimensional, or three-dimensional; and 
5) Rotational or irrotational 
When  we  have  fluid  flow  in  which  the  fluid  particles  do  not experience  any  rotational 
motion about their centers of mass, the flow is termed irrotational. This kind of flow can 
be represented by a flow net. The fluid undergoing irrotational motion is referred to as an 
ideal fluid. We can define an ideal fluid as one in which no shear stresses occur and hence 
no torque exists. 
 
1.5.1 Steady Flow 
 
Steady flow occurs if, at any point, the velocity of successive fluid particles is the same at 
successive periods of time. Thus, velocity is constant with respect to time hence we can 
mathematically define this condition as V/t = 0. The velocity may vary at different points 
or with respect to distance. Based on this statement, we may as well say  that other fluid 
variables will not vary with time, implying that p/t = 0, /t = 0, Q/t = 0, etc. 
 

 
12 
 
 
Figure 4. Steady flow (a) and unsteady flow (b) 
 
Most  practical  engineering  flow  problems  involve steady  flow  conditions. For  example, 
pipelines carrying liquids under constant head conditions or orifices flowing under constant 
heads illustrate steady flow. These flows may be uniform or non-uniform. 
 
1.5.2 Uniform Flow 
 
Uniform  flow  occurs  when  the  magnitude  and  direction  of  velocity  do  not  change  from 
point to point in the fluid. This statement can mathematically be represented by V/s = 0. 
The statement implies that other fluid variables do not change with distance, or, y/s = 0, 
/s = 0, p/s = 0, etc. You should note that flow of liquids under pressure through long 
pipelines  of  constant  diameter  is uniform  flow  whether  the  flow  is  steady  or  unsteady. 
Figure 5 is an illustration of uniform flow. 
 
 
Figure 5. Uniform flow. Modified from McDonough (2009). 
 

 
13 
 
On  the  other  hand,  non-uniform  flow  occurs  when  the  velocity,  depth,  pressure,  etc., 
change from point to point as the fluid flows. In this case, V/s  0 and this is true for the 
other fluid variables too. Figure 5 illustrates non-uniform flow. 
 
Figure 6. Non-uniform flow. Modified from McDonough (2009).  
 
1.5.3 Stream lines 
 
Stream lines are imaginary curves drawn through a fluid to indicate the direction of motion 
in various sections of the fluid flow system (Figure 7). McDonough (2009) stated that the 
tangent at each point on a streamline is the direction of the velocity vector at that point. 
 
 
 
Figure 7. Stream lines for a converging pipe section 
 
1.5.4 Stream tubes 
 
A  stream  tube  represents  elementary  portions  of  a  flowing  fluid  bounded  by  a  group  of 
streamlines that confine the flow (see Figure 8). If the stream tube’s cross-sectional area is 

 
14 
 
sufficiently small, we can take the velocity along the midpoint of any cross section as the 
average velocity for the section as a whole. 
 
 
Figure 8. Elemental stream tube 
 
 
1.5.5 Continuity Equation 
 
The  equation  of  continuity  results  from  the  principle  of  conservation  of  mass. We  can 
conveniently define mass in terms of the quantity of liquid which passes a given section in 
unit time. This is referred to as mass flow.  
 
For steady flow, the mass of fluid passing all sections in a stream of fluid per unit time is 
the same. This can be evaluated as the mass flow rate. 
 
 1.10 
 
or 
 
 1.11 
 
For incompressible fluids  and  where 
1
 = 
2
 or ρ
1
 = ρ
2
 for  all  practical  purposes,  the 
equation becomes 

 
15 
 
 
 1.12 
 
Where  A
1
 and  V
1
 are  respectively  the  cross-sectional  area  and  average  velocity  of  the 
stream at section 1, with similar terms for section 2.  Units of flow are cubic metres per 
second (m
3
/s). This is known as the continuity equation. 
 
1.5.6 Energy head 
 
Moving fluids possess energy.  We need to consider three forms of energy when analysing 
fluid flow problems. The forms of energy are 
 
1) Potential; 
2) Kinetic; and 
3) Pressure energy 
 
We can illustrate these energy forms using Figure 9. 
 
 
Figure 9. Fluid element within a conduit 

 
16 
 
 
Consider the fluid element within the conduit shown in the diagram above. The element is 
located a distance z above a reference datum and has a velocity v and pressure p. 
 
 
1.5.6.1 Potential energy 
Potential energy (PE) refers to the energy possessed by a fluid element due to its elevation 
above  a  reference  datum.  We  can determine it quantitatively  by  multiplying  the  weight 
(W)  of  the  element  by  the  distance at  which the  element  is  located  above  the  reference 
datum (z). Therefore, 
  1.13 
 
 
In a continuous flow process, however, it is convenient for us to think in terms of unit mass 
at  a  particular  point  in  the  liquid  stream. The  energy  per  unit  mass  is  called  the specific 
potential energy of the liquid.  Thus, specific potential energy is 
 
 1.14 
 
 
1.5.6.2 Kinetic energy 
 
Kinetic energy refers to the energy possessed by an element of fluid due to its velocity. 
Kinetic energy (KE) is determined quantitatively by   
 
 1.15 
 
 
Similarly  since  this  is  a  continuous  flow  process,  the  energy  per  unit  mass  is  called  the 
specific kinetic energy of the liquid. 

 
17 
 
Thus per unit mass 
 
 1.16 
 
 
1.5.6.3 Pressure energy 
 
Pressure energy, sometimes called flow energy, is the amount of work required to force 
the element of fluid across a certain distance against pressure 
 
 
The pressure energy (FE) can be evaluated by determining the work done in moving the 
fluid element a distance equal to the segment’s length (d). 
The force causing work is the product of pressure (p) and cross-sectional area (A) of the 
element.  Hence 
    
 1.17 
 
The term Ad, is in fact, the volume of the element. Hence 
  
FE = pv  
but v = m/ 
Therefore,  
1.18 
 
Similarly, if we consider a unit mass, FE = p/. This is called the specific pressure head 
of the liquid in the pipe line. 
 
1.5.7 Energy equation 
 

 
18 
 
We can derive the energy equation by applying the principle of conservation of energy to 
fluid flow.  Let us consider two points 1 and 2 as shown in Figure 10. 
 
 
Figure 10. Illustration of the Energy Equation components 
 
 
 
You will recall that the energy possessed by a flowing fluid consists of internal energy and 
energies  due  to  pressure (p),  velocity (v),  and  position (z). In  the  direction  of  flow,  the 
energy principle is summarised by the general equation: 
 
Energy at section 1 + energy added – energy lost – energy extracted = energy at section 2 
 
 1. 19 
 
 
 

 
19 
 
This  equation  is  known  as  the Bernoulli  theorem. The Bernoulli’s  equation  can be 
expressed  in  terms  of  equivalent  heads.    Thus,  if  we divide the  above  equation  by  g we 
have:-  
 
 1.20 
 
 
 
 
Each  term of  the  Bernoulli  equation  is measured  in  metres  of  liquid. Many  problems 
dealing  with  flow  of  liquids  use  this  equation  as  the  basis  of  solution. Flow  of  gases,  in 
many instances, involves principles of thermodynamics and heat transfer. Many problems 
dealing with flow of liquids use this equation as the basis of solution. 
 
1.5.8 Velocity head 
 
Velocity head represents the kinetic energy per unit weight of a fluid at a particular point. 
If  the  velocity  at  a  cross-section  were  uniform,  then  the  velocity  head that  we  would 
calculate with this uniform or average velocity would be the true kinetic energy per unit 
weight of fluid. 
 
1.5.9 Power 
 
Power is calculated by multiplying the number of Newtons of fluid flowing per second (Q) 
by energy H in Nm/N.  
 
 1.21 
 
1.5.10 Flow in Closed Conduits 
 

 
20 
 
The energy principle is applied in the solution of practical closed-conduit flow problems 
in different branches of engineering practice. Flow of a real fluid is more complex than that 
of an ideal fluid. Results of experimentation and semi-empirical methods must be used to 
solve flow problems. 
 
 
Two types of steady flow of real fluids exist, which must be understood and considered. 
They are laminar flow and turbulent flow. Different laws govern the two types of flow. 
 
1.5.10.1 Laminar Flow 
 
In laminar flow, fluid particles move along straight, parallel paths in layers or laminae. 
Magnitudes of velocities of adjacent laminae are not the same. 
 
1.5.10.2 Turbulent Flow 
  
In turbulent flow, fluid particles move in haphazard fashion in all directions. It is virtually 
impossible to trace the motion of an individual particle. 
1.5.10.3 Critical Velocity 
 
Critical  velocity is of  practical  interest  to  engineers.  It is  the  velocity below  which  all 
turbulence is damped out by the viscosity of the  fluid. It is found that the upper limit of 
laminar flow of practical interest is represented by a Reynolds number of about 2000. 
 
1.5.10.4 Reynolds Number 
 
The Reynolds number (Re) is a dimensionless number which represents the ratio of inertia 
forces to viscous forces. For circular pipes that are flowing full, we can find the Reynolds 
number using the following equation: 
 

 
21 
 
 1.22 
 
 
   where  V = mean velocity in m/s 
                         d = diameter of pipe in m 
                          = kinematic viscosity in m
2
/s 
                          = mass density of fluid in kg/m
3
  
 = absolute viscosity in Ns/m
2
  
 
For non-circular cross sections, we use the ratio of cross-sectional area to wetted perimeter, 
called  the hydraulic  radius, R  (in  metres), to  calculate the  Reynolds  number.    The 
following equation is used for non-circular cross sections: 
 
 1.23 
 
 
1.5.11 Loss of head for laminar flow 
 
Loss of head for laminar flow is expressed by the Hagen-Poiseulle equation. 
The expression is 
 
 
 
 1.24 
 
 
The other equation used to determine head loss is known as the Darcy-Weisbach formula 
and it reads: 

 
22 
 
퐿퐿퐿퐿 ℎ퐿퐿퐿=퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿 퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿 퐿 × 
퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿ℎ 퐿
퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿 퐿
 ×퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿 ℎ퐿퐿퐿 
퐿
2
2퐿
  
 
 1.25 
 
 
 
For laminar flow in all pipes for all fluids, the value of f is:   
 
 1.26 
 
 
Re  has  a practical  maximum  value  of  2000  for  laminar  flow. For turbulent  flow,  many 
hydraulic  engineers  have  endeavoured  to  evaluate f from  the  results  of  their  own 
experiments and from those of others. 
 
1.5.11.1 Minor head losses 
 
Other head losses are generally categorised as “minor” head losses. They result when there 
is  a  significant  change  in  flow  pattern. Hence,  they  occur  in  conduit  contractions  and 
enlargements (both sudden and gradual)), valves, fittings, bends, etc., and entrance to or 
exit from a conduit. In some cases, a “minor” loss can be quite important. 
 
1.5.11.2 Entrance losses 
 
Entrance losses occur when a liquid enters a conduit from a large tank or reservoir. 
The amount of head loss is significantly dependent on the shape of the entrance. 
If an entrance is well rounded, the entrance loss will be very small. 
 
1.5.11.3 Exit losses 
 

 
23 
 
Exit losses occur  when  a  liquid  exits  a  conduit  and  enters  a  large  tank  or  reservoir. The 
losses can be due to sudden contractions, sudden expansions, gradual expansions or gradual 
contractions. Sudden contraction losses occur when there is an abrupt decrease in conduit 
size and sudden expansion losses happen when there is an abrupt increase in conduit size. 
Similarly, gradual expansion losses occur when there is a gradual increase in conduit size, 
and gradual contraction losses happen when there is a gradual decrease in conduit size. 
 
Theoretical  considerations  of  the  various  minor  losses  are  quite  complicated;  therefore, 
minor losses are usually evaluated by empirical methods. 
They are commonly expressed in terms of the applicable velocity head.  In equation form, 
 
 1.27 
 
 
Activity: Example 
 
Water  is  conveyed  through  a  trapezoidal  irrigation  canal  at  a  volumetric  flow  rate  of 
15m
3
/sec.  The  canal  has  a  bottom  width  of  3  m  and  the  water  is  flowing  at  an  effective 
depth of 2 m. If the top width of the flowing water is 9 m. What is the velocity head of the 
water? 
 
Solution: 
We will start with an illustration of the canal: 
 
 

 
24 
 
From our knowledge about the area of a trapezium, we can find the cross area (A) of flow 
as follows: 
퐿=
1
2
(
퐿+퐿
)
ℎ 
where A is the cross sectional area (m
2
); b the canal bottom width (m); T the water 
flow top width; and h the effective water depth 
 
Hence,     퐿=
1
2
(
3퐿+9퐿
)
2퐿 
 
퐿=12 퐿
2
  
From the Continuity Equation, Q = AV. Therefore, 15m
3
/s = 12 m
2
 x V 
Hence,     퐿=1.25 퐿/퐿  
Now let us find the velocity head using the equation, 퐿
퐿
= 
퐿
2
2퐿
  
 
퐿
퐿
= 
(1.25 퐿/퐿)
2
2(9.81 퐿/퐿
2
 
 
푯
푯
= 푯.푯푯 푯 
 
 
Unit Summary 
In this unit we have discussed the nature and properties of fluids at rest and in motion. We 
encounter fluids in our everyday life. Therefore, the knowledge acquired in the unit will be 
essential  in  design,  operation  and  evaluation  of  hydraulic  structures such  as  irrigation 
canals, reservoirs and water pipelines.  
 
 
Unit Test 
Answer all questions. 

 
25 
 
1.6.1 Water is conveyed at a constant volumetric flow rate of 2.3 x 10
-2
 m
3
/s through a 
pipeline  whose  internal  diameter  is  15  cm.  The  water  flow  condition  is  laminar 
(Re = 1,400). Find the following: 
a) Friction factor 
b) Water velocity 
c) Velocity head 
1.6.2 A  fluid  mass  occupies  2  m
3
.Calculate  the  density,  specific  weight,  and  specific 
gravity if the fluid mass is 
a) 4 kg 
b) 8 kg 
c) 15 kg 
 
1.6.3 A formula that provides a good estimate of the density in kg/m
3
 of water is 
 
퐿
퐿퐿퐿퐿퐿
=1000− 
(
퐿−4
)
2
180
 
 
where the temperature T is in degrees Celsius.  
a) Use this formula and find the density of water at 80
o
C. 
b) What is the error? 
 
 
Suggested Answers to the Unit Test 
  
Here are the suggested answers for the Unit Test: 
 
Model Answer for Activity 1.6.1:     
a) f = 0.0457 
b) V = 1.3015 m/s 

 
26 
 
c) Velocity head = 0.086 m 
  
Model Answer for Activity 1.6.2: 
a) 2 kg = m
3
; 19.62 N = m
3
;   0.002 
b) 4 kg = m
3
;  39.24 N = m
3
;   0.004 
c) 7.5 kg = m
3
;  73.6 N = m
3
;  0.0075 
 
Model Answers for Activity 1.6.3: 
a) 968 kg/m
3
  
b) -0.4% 

 
27 
 
UNIT 2: HEAT AND CALORIMETRY 
2.0 Introduction 
Welcome to unit 2! In unit 1 we discussed fluid mechanics, however in this topic you will 
be introduced to key principals in heat transfer and thermodynamics.  
2.1 Objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 
 Differentiate heat from temperature 
 State four examples of temperature scales 
 Convert temperature from one scale to another scale 
 Measure the amount of heat transfer using a calorimeter 
Key terms 
Ensure that you understand the key term phrases used in this unit as listed below. 
 Temperature 
 Heat 
 Specific heat 
 Calorimetry 
2.2 Temperature 
From our primary school knowledge we have always defined temperature as the degree of 
hotness  or  coldness.  This  definition  is  based  on  our  sense  of  touch:  cold  or  hot.  We 
generally consider a hot oven to have high temperature than a cold tray of ice. However 
defining temperature by solely depending on the sense of touch might give us wrong results. 
For example, if your hands were placed in hot water and then you shift to place the same 
hands in lukewarm water you will feel cold, on the contrary if you place the hands in the 
cold water first and then shift them to lukewarm water you would feel water.  
We shall now define temperature as, the measure of average kinetic energy (thermal energy) 
of the molecules of the body. Temperature is directly proportional to the average molecular 
kinetic  energy.  The  greater  the  average  kinetic  energy  of  the  molecules  of  a  body,  the 
greater is the temperature of the body. In this case we may conclude that temperature of a 

 
28 
 
body depends  only on  the  molecular  kinetic  energy  and it  is  independent  of  mass of  a 
substance.  
When we bring together two bodies of different temperatures into contact, heat flows from 
a body at higher temperature to the body at lower temperature till the temperatures of the 
two bodies are the same. Temperature guides the direction of heat flow between two bodies 
of different temperatures in contact. 
2.2.1 Temperature Scales 
There are four temperature scales 
Celsius Scale 
On this scale, the ice point (melting point) is marked as 0°C and the steam point (boiling 
point)  is  marked  as  100°C.  Both  the  melting  and  boiling  points  are  taken  at  normal 
atmospheric  pressure.  The  interval  between  these  points  is  divided  into  100  equal  parts. 
Each  of  these  divisions  gives  one  degree  Celsius  (1°C).  If  the  thermometer  is  needed  to 
measure  temperatures  outside  the  ice  and  steam  points,  then  the  scale  markings  are 
continued  below  the  0°C  mark  and  above  100°C  mark.  The  distance  between  the 
consecutive marks on the scale remains the same. 
 Fahrenheit Scale 
On this scale, the ice point is marked as 32°F and the steam point is marked 212°F. The 
interval between these two reference points is divided into 180 equal parts. Each division 
is called degree Fahrenheit and is written as °F 
Temperature scale Freezing  Point  of 
Water 
Boiling    Point    of 
Water 
SI Unit 
FAHRENHEIT 
SCALE 
32°F 212°F F 
CELSIUS SCALE 0°C 100°C C 
KELVIN SCALE 273.15K 373.15K K 

 
29 
 
REAUMER 
SCALE 
0°R 80°R R 
 
2.2.2 Conversion Equations 
The relationship among Celsius, Fahrenheit and Reaumur scales is given as 
 t
C
÷100 = (t
F
-32)/180 = t
R
÷ 80       2.1 
Other relationships 
a. F = 1.8C + 32          2.2 
b. K = C + 273.15         2.3 
Example 1 
If the temperature of the room is 20°C, what is its temperature in degrees Fahrenheit? 
Solution: We  are  going  to  apply  equation  2.2  to  convert  degrees  Celsius  to  degrees 
Fahrenheit. 
Then F = 1.8 x 20 + 32 = 68°F 
Kelvin Scale and the absolute Zero 
The Kelvin scale is setup so that its zero point is the coldest possible temperature--absolute 
zero, at which point a substance would have zero internal energy.  This is -273.15 °C, or -
459.69 °F. Absolute zero can never be reached, but there is no limit to how close we can 
get to it.  Scientists have cooled substances to within 10
-5
 kelvins of absolute zero.  How 
do we know how cold absolute zero is, if nothing has ever been at that temperature?  The 
answer is by graphing Pressure vs. Temperature for a variety of gases and extrapolating. 

 
30 
 
 
The Triple Point of Water 
We can define the triple point of water as a point where water in a solid, liquid and  gas 
states can coexist in aquarium and this occurs only at a unique temperature and pressure. 
The pressure at the triple point of water is 4.58 mm of Hg and the temperature is 273.16K 
or 0.01°C. 
 Activity 1 
An  object  has  a  temperature  of  50°F.  What  is  its  temperature  in  degrees  Celsius  and  in 
Kelvin? [10°C; 283K] 
2.3 Specific heats 
Specific heat is the energy that is transferred from one body to another due to temperature 
difference  between  two  bodies. Or  is  the transfer  of  internal  (thermal)  energy  from  one 
body to another. The SI  unit for heat is joule, but can also be measured in calories Heat 
transfer depends on temperature gradient 
2.3.1 Heat capacity 
The amount of heat required to raise its temperature by 1°C. 
Heat capacity is also called thermal capacity 
Heat capacity = mc 
Specific heat 

 
31 
 
Is the heat capacity of a substance per unit mass 
c = Heat capacity/m 
Alternatively  we  may  define  heat  capacity  as the  amount  of  heat  required  to  raise  the 
temperature of 1 kg of a substance by 1°C or 1K. The SI Unit is J/Kg/°C or J/Kg/K Specific 
heat is represented by c. 
2.3.2 Water Equivalent 
The mass of water that will absorb or loose the same amount of heat as the body for the 
same rise or fall in temperature is known as water equivalent. Water equivalent is measured 
in kg. For instance, if you are told that the water equivalent for a body is  12kg, this means 
that  when  a  body  is  heated  through  12°C,  it  will  absorb  the  same  amount  of    heat  as 
absorbed by 12kg. 
Q = w ΔT  
But Q = cm ΔT  
Equating the two equations we have 
wΔT = cm ΔT  
w = mc 
From Equation ---- we may conclude that water equivalent and heat capacity of a body are 
numerically equal. 
2.3.4 Molar Specific Heat 
Molar specific heat of a solid (liquid) is defined as the amount of heat required to raise the 
temperature of 1 mole of the solid (liquid) through 1°C OR 1 K. We can now represent the 
amount of heat Q required to raise the temperature ΔT of n moles is presented as: 
Q = nC ΔT           2.5 
But n = m/M and capital c (C) stands for molar specific heat. 
C = Mc           2.6 
2.3.5 Specific heat of a gas 
We shall adopt the same definition for specific heat as the one used in solids and liquid. 
On  the  contrary,  the  situation  with  gasses  is  quite  different.  When  a  gas  is  heated,  there 
may be large changes in pressure and volume. When we want to define a specific heat, it 
is necessary to specify the particular conditions of pressure and volume. A gas can have 
any value of specific heat depending on how the heating has been carried out. 

 
32 
 
We are going to consider two practical conditions in which we have values of specific heat 
of a gas: specific heat of a gas at constant volume (C
v
) and specific heat of a gas at constant 
pressure (C
p
). 
Specific heat at constant volume: The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 
1 mole of the gas through 1°C at constant volume is referred to as specific heat at constant 
temperature. It is measured in J/kg/K or cal/g/K. If we are given 1 mole of the gas instead 
of 1g, then we will be dealing with molar specific heat of a gas at constant volume. 
Molar Specific heat of a gas at constant volume is the amount of heat required to raise the 
temperature  of  1  mole  of  the  gas  through  1°C  at  constant  volume.  We  use  capital  C
v 
to 
denote  molar  specific  heat  at  constant  volume  where  as  c
v 
represents  specific  heat  at 
constant volume. 
C
v
 = Mc
v
           2.7 
Where M = Molecular mass of the gas and the SI units of C
v 
J/mol/K or cal/mol/K. 
Specific heat of a gas at constant pressure: this is the amount of heat required to raise 
the temperature of 1g of the gas through 1°C at constant pressure. The SI units are the same 
as those for specific heat capacity at constant volume. On the other hand, molar specific 
heat at constant pressure is defined as the amount of heat required to raise the temperature 
of 1 mole of a gas through 1 °C at constant pressure. 
C
p
 = Mc
p           
2.8 
Relationship between C
v
 and C
p
 
a.  
b. C
v
 = R; C
P
 = R for monoatomic gas 
c. C
v
 = R; C
p 
= R for diatomic gas 
R = 8.31J/mol/K 
When you want to calculate the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of a gas 
you use equation 2.5 but you substitute C
v 
and C
p
 for specific heat (C): 
Q at constant volume: Q = n C
v 
ΔT        2.8 
Q at constant pressure: Q = n C
p
 ΔT        2.9  

 
33 
 
Example: 
How much heat is required to raise the temperature of an ideal monoatomic gas by 10K if 
the gas is maintained at constant pressure? 
Solution: 
Lets consider what we have first: n = 1 mole, ΔT = 10K, R = 8.31J/mol/K, we are also told 
that the gas is monoatomic and is at constant pressure. In this case we are going to employ 
equation 2.9. 
Q = n C
p
 ΔT  
C
P
 = R =  
Q = 1mol x x 10 K = 207.5 J 
Activity 3. 
What is the specific heat of a substance if 36 Kcal of heat is needed to raise 4.5 Kg of the 
metal from 20° C to 42°C [0.36 Cal/g/°C] 
 
2.3 Calorimetry 
Is the experimental technique for quantitative measurement of heat exchange. The law of 
heat exchange is applied in calorimetry. Law of heat exchange states that, “for completely 
an isolated closed system, no energy can flow into or out of the system.” 
Alternatively, Heat lost = Heat gained. 
A calorimeter is used to determine the specific heat of a substance. 
Heat lost by the substance is gained by and the calorimeter. 
Heat gained by the calorimeter  
                  = (m
1
+w) × c
’
× (T
 
-T
1
) 
Heat lost by the substance 
                  = m
2
c(T
2
 – T) 
Where: 
m
1
=Mass of water in the calorimeter 
w = Water equivalent of the calorimeter 

 
34 
 
T
1
= Initial temperature of water + calorimeter 
m
2
= Mass of the substance 
T
2
= Initial temperature of a substance 
T= Final temperature 
c = specific heat capacity of the substance 
c
’
= Specific heat of water 
Heat gained = heat lost 
            (m
1
+w) × c
’
× (T
 
-T
1
) = m
2
c(T
2
 – T)       2.4 
And c can be given as 
           c = [(m
1
+w) × c
’
× (T
 
-T
1
)]/m
2
(T
2
 – T) 
Example 
When a piece of metal of mass 48.3g at 10.7 °C was immersed in a current of stream at 
100 °C, 0.762g of steam was found to condense. Calculate the specific heat of the metal 
(L
V
 of steam: 536 cal).   
Heat gained = 48.3×c×(100-10.7) cal 
Heat lost = mass of condensed matter × latent heat of steam 
                 = 0.762×536 cal 
Then: 48.3×c×(100-10.7) cal = 0.762×536 cal 
          c = (0.76×536)÷ [48.3×(100 – 10.7) 
             = 0.095 cal/g/°C.      
   
 

 
35 
 
The outer and inner surfaces of the calorimeter are polished heat to reduce heat loss due to 
radiation 
The  space  between  a  calorimeter  and  the  insulating  jacket  is  filled  with  some  poor 
conductor (e.g. Air, cotton) to avoid heat loss by conduction 
The lid is insulated to avoid heat loss by convection. The insulated lid has two holes, one 
for stirring (mixing contents) and the other for thermometer. 
 Activity 2 
A copper block of mass 2.5 kg is heated in a furnace to a temperature of 500°C and then 
placed on a large ice block. What is the maximum amount of ice that can melt? (Specific 
heat of copper = 0.39 J/g/°C; Heat of fusion of water = 335J/g) [1.455kg] 
2.6 Practice Activity 
In an experiment on the specific heat of a metal, a 0.20 kg block of the metal at 150°C is 
dropped in a copper calorimeter (of water equivalent 0.025 kg) containing 150 cm
3
 of water 
at  27°C.  The  final  temperature  is  40°C.  Compute  the  specific  heat  of  the  metal. 
[0.434J/g/°C] 
 2.7 Unit summary 
In this unit we have discussed important concepts of heat and temperature which will lead 
to heat transfer and thermodynamics. We have seen that though heat and temperature are 
related but they are not the same. Specific heat, mass and temperature are very significant 
in calorimetry. Calorimetry is the science of measuring heat. 
Unit Test 
1. If two temperatures differ by 25° on a Celsius scale, what is the difference on Fahrenheit 
scale? 
2. A calorimeter contains 70.2 g of water at 15.3°C. If 143.7g of water at 36.5°C is mixed 
with it, the common temperature is 28.7°C. Find the water equivalent of the calorimeter.  
3. A piece of iron of mass 16g is dropped at a temperature of 112.5°C into a cavity in a block 
of ice of which it melts 2.5g. If the latent heat of fusion of ice is 80 cal/g, find the specific 
heat of iron.  

 
36 
 
 Suggested Answers to Unit Activities 
Activity 1 
10°C; 283K 
Activity 2 
1.455kg 
Activity 3 
0.36 cal/g/°C 
Practice Activity 
0.434J/g/°C 
Unit Test 
1. 45°F 
2. 13.4g 
3. 0.11cal/g/°C 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 3: Heat and Heat Transfer 
 
3.0 Introduction 
 
Welcome  to Unit  2.  In  this  unit,  we  will  discuss  concepts  of  heat, its transfer and 
measurement. You will agree that heat forms an integral part of our daily life. For example, 
we  need  heat  to  cook  our  food  and  to  keep  us  warm.  This  unit  is  therefore  of  prime 
importance because it will help us deepen our understanding of heat, its measurement and 
transfer. 

 
37 
 
 
 
 
3.1 Objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 
1) Understand and state the different concepts of heat transfer 
2) Acquire knowledge on measurement of temperature and heat 
3) Apply the laws of heat transfer in solving problems related to the same 
 
 
 
Key Terms 
Ensure that you understand the key terms used in this unit as listed below. 
 Heat 
 Temperature 
 Latent heat 
 Specific heat 
 Sublimation 
 
 Convection 
 Radiation 
 Conduction 
 Heat capacity 
 Sensible heat

 
2 
 
 
3.2 Heat and Temperature 
 
3.2.1 Heat 
 
We will start by discussing what heat is and have a quick overview of how heat gets 
transferred from one location to another. Heat is a form of energy. As you are aware, 
the molecules of a body are in constant motion. The moving molecules possess kinetic 
energy referred to as heat. Heat is transferred from a warmer to a colder body because 
of the temperature difference between the two bodies. 
 
 
3.2.2 Temperature 
 
We can define temperature as the intensity of heat or a measure of how hot or cold an 
object is. In other words, temperature is an indication of molecular activity since (as we 
saw earlier on) moving molecules possess kinetic energy referred to as heat. In the SI 
system, temperature is measured in degrees Celsius (named after Anders Celsius). Its 
temperature scale is referred to as the centigrade scale. The scale involves choosing two 
fixed  points  (i.e.  two  easily  reproducible  temperatures),  and  dividing the  interval 
between them into a number of ‘degrees’. 
 
Anders Celsius chose the temperature of melting ice and boiling water (both at normal 
atmosphere), and the arbitrary number 100 degrees. The Celsius scale is still defined 
this way but an improvement has been made in which the scale is divided and a more 
reliable fixed point has been introduced. 
 
The other temperature unit is Kelvin (named after Lord Kelvin). This is referred to as 
the absolute temperature scale. Lord Kelvin showed that a temperature scale might be 
divided in a way which does not depend on the properties of a particular substance. 
He  proposed  that  ‘Zero’  must  be  located  at  the  lowest  temperature  possible. Both 
theoretical considerations and practical experience indicate that it is impossible to reach 
a temperature lower than -273.15
o
C and this is known as the absolute zero temperature. 

 
3 
 
Th e resulting scale is the Kelvin Thermodynamic Temperature Scale and its unit is the 
Kelvin (K). 
 
 Equation 28 
Or 
 Equation 29 
 
Another temperature scale is known as the Fahrenheit. Its relationship to the centigrade 
scale is as follows: 
 
 Equation 30 
Or 
 Equation 31 
 
 
 
3.2.3 Temperature and Heat Measurements 
 
Let us now look at the instruments and methods used to measure heat intensity. Table 
1 presents a list of the measurements and their respective instruments: 
 
Table 1. Instruments and methods for measuring heat intensity  
Measurement Instrument/Method of Measurement 
Thermal expansion Bi-metallic    thermometers;    Liquid-in-
glass  (mercury,  alcohol)  thermometers; 
Pressure thermometers 
Thermo-electricity Thermocouple 
Resistance Resistance   thermometers; Thermistors 
(semi-conductor); Integrated circuit 
detectors (temperature transducers) 

 
4 
 
Radiation Pyranometers 
It is worth noting that the most common thermometers are mercury–in– glass. 
 
Before we proceed, let us pause and define some of the important terms which we will 
be  using  in  the  discussions  that  follow.  One  of  such  terms  is  ambient  temperature. 
Ambient temperature is the temperature of the medium surrounding a body or system, 
e.g. room  air  temperature. The  other  term  is  specific  heat, the  dimensionless  ratio 
between the thermal capacity of a material to that of water. Heat quantity is measured 
in Joules. The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one gram of water by 
1° Kelvin is 4.187 Joules. This quantity is equivalent to one calorie of heat. 
 
 
 
3.3 Specific Heat 
The actual thermal capacity (specific heat capacity) measured in J/(kg°K) is often listed 
as specific heat. It is defined as the heat capacity of a substance per unit mass. 
Specific heat is essentially a measure of how thermally insensitive a substance is to the 
addition of energy. The greater the material’s specific heat, the more energy must be 
added to a given mass of the material to cause a particular temperature change. 
 
For gases, heat capacity at constant pressure is a strong function of temperature. 
Heat capacity is an additive property, i.e. the heat capacity of a mixture of gases can be 
determined from the heat capacities of the constituents weighted accordingly. 
The  heat  capacities  of  solids  cannot  be  predicted  from  fundamental  relationships  but 
they  are  amenable  to  experimental  measurement. However,  a  particularly  useful 
method of estimating heat capacity in the absence of experimental data is the Kopp’s 
rule  which  is  based  on  the  fact  that  heat  capacity  is  an  additive  property.    It  may  be 
stated as follows: 
  
 The heat capacity of a solid compound is approximately equal to the sum of 
the  heat capacities of its constituents.  
 

 
5 
 
The heat capacities of liquids are generally greater than those of solids and gases; heat 
capacity  usually  increases  with  temperature.  For  foodstuff,  heat capacity is  strongly 
dependent upon moisture content. 
 
 
3.4 Sensible Heat 
Sensible heat is the heat that causes a temperature change when there is a heat transfer. 
We  can  also  define  sensible heat  as  a  measure  of  the  energy that  accompanies  a 
temperature change. A good example of sensible heat is heat moving through the walls 
of a home causing a temperature rise in the process. We can determine total sensible 
heat using the following equation: 
 3.1 
 
 where q
s
 = total sensible heat (J); m = mass of material (kg); c = specific heat capacity 
of the material (J/(kg°K); t
1
 = temperature (°C) of the material at condition 1; and t
2
 = 
temperature (°C) of the material at condition 2. 
 
 
3.5 Latent Heat 
Latent heat is the heat that causes a change in state but no change in temperature. The 
heat that is absorbed when ice changes to water (solid to liquid) is known as latent heat 
of  fusion  (L
f
).  When  boiling  water  changes  to  vapour (liquid  to  vapour),  the  heat 
involved is latent heat of vapourisation (L
v
).  
 
You  will  recall  that  at normal  pressures,  most  chemical  compounds  and  elements 
possess three different states (solid, liquid, gas) at different temperatures. In these cases, 
the transition from solid to gaseous state requires an intermediate liquid state. However, 
for some elements or substances at some pressures, the material may pass directly from 
solid to  gaseous  state. This  can  occur  if  the  atmospheric  pressure  exerted  on  the 
substance is too low to stop the molecules from escaping from solid state. When a solid 
changes  to  vapour  without  going  through  the  liquid  phase (solid  to  vapour), the  heat 

 
6 
 
involved is referred to as latent heat of sublimation (L
s
). Carbon dioxide is a common 
example of chemical compounds that sublime at atmospheric pressure. A block of solid 
CO
2
 (dry ice) at room temperature and at atmospheric pressure will turn to gas without 
becoming a liquid. The opposite of sublimation is deposition. The formation of frost is 
an example of meteorological deposition. 
 
Let us now look at an example on the heat involved when water evaporates to water 
vapour. This occurs over a wide range of temperatures.  
 
When air moves across the surface of water, some of the air's sensible heat is converted 
to  latent  heat  causing  the  air  temperature  to  drop.    The  latent  heat  of  vaporisation 
changes with temperature as presented in Table 2. 
 
Table 2. Latent Heat of Vaporisation for Water 
°C kJ/kg 
0 2500 
30 2430 
100 2256 
      
      
You should know that different materials have different properties hence latent heat of 
vaporization  and  latent  heat  of  fusion  vary  from  one material  to  another. Table  3 
presents latent heat properties of different substances.   
 
 

 
7 
 
Table 3.  Latent  heat  of  fusion  and  latent  heat  of  vaporisation  for  various 
substances 
 
 
When a gas cools, it eventually condenses – that is, it returns to the liquid phase. 
The energy given up per unit mass is called the latent heat of condensation (L
c
) and is 
numerically equal to the latent heat of vaporisation. Likewise, when a liquid cools, it 
eventually  solidifies,  and  the  latent  heat  of  solidification  is  numerically  equal  to  the 
latent heat of fusion. 
 
Activity: Phase Change Example 
 
You will recall that there are three states (or phases) of matter namely gas, liquid and 
solid. In order for us to understand the role of latent heat in phase changes, consider the 
energy required to convert 1.0 g cube of ice at -30.0°C, to steam at 120°C. Figure 11 
indicates the experimental results obtained when energy is gradually added to the ice. 
Let us examine each portion of the curve. 
 
 

 
8 
 
 
Figure 11. A  plot  of  temperature  versus  energy  added  when  1.00g  of  ice  initially  at -30.0°C  is 
converted to steam at 120.0°C 
Part A.  On this portion of the curve, the temperature of the ice changes from -30°C to 
0°C.  Because the specific heat of ice is 2090 J/kg°C, we can calculate the amount of 
energy added by:  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part B.  When the temperature of the ice reaches 0°C, the ice-water mixture remains at 
this temperature, even though energy is being added, until all the ice melts.  The energy 
required to melt 1.0 g of ice is:  
 
Thus we have moved to the 396 J (62.7J + 333J) mark on the energy axis in Figure 11.  
 
Part C.  Between 0.0°C and 100.0°C, no phase change occurs, and so all the energy 
added to the water is used to increase its temperature. The amount of energy necessary 
to increase the temperature from 0.0°C to 100.0°C is:  
 
 
 
 

JQ
CCkgJkgQ
TcmQii
7.62
30./2090100.1
3





JQ
CCkgJkgQ
TcmQww
419
0.100./1019.41000.1
33





JkgJkgLmQ
fi
333/1033.31000.1
53



 
9 
 
 
 
Part D.  At 100.0°C, another phase change occurs as the water changes from water at 
100.0°C  to  steam  at  100.0°C. The  water-steam  mixture  remains  at  100.0°C,  even 
though energy is being added, until all of the liquid has been converted to steam. The 
energy required to convert 1.00g of water to steam at 100.0°C is:  
 
 
 
 
 
Part E.  In this portion of the curve, as in parts A and C, no phase change occurs; thus, 
all energy added is used to increase the temperature of the steam. The energy that must 
be added to raise the temperature of the steam from 100.0°C to 120°C is:  
 
 
 
 
The total amount of energy that must be added to change 1g of ice at -30.0°C to steam 
at 120°C is the sum of the results from all the five parts of the curve, which is equal to 
3.11×10
3
J.  Conversely,  to  cool  1g  of  steam  at  120.0°C  to  ice  at -30.0°C,  we  must 
remove 3.11×10
3
J of energy. The results show that a relatively large amount of energy 
is transferred into the water to vaporise it to steam.  
 
Now, let us imagine reversing this process, there is a large amount of energy transferred 
out of steam to condense it into water. This is why a burn to your skin from steam at 
100°C is much more damaging than exposure of your skin to water at 100°C. A very 
large amount of energy  enters  your skin from steam and the steam remains at 100°C 
for  a  long  time  while  it  condenses. Conversely,  when  your  skin  makes  contact  with 
water  at  100°C,  the  water  temperature immediately  begins  to  drop as  energy is 
transferred from the water to your skin.  
 
3.6 Thermal Capacity 

JQ
kgJkgQ
LmQvw
3
63
1026.2
/1026.21000.1





JQ
CCkgJkgQ
TcmQss
3
63
102.40
0.20./1001.21000.1





 
10 
 
We define thermal (heat) capacity as the ability of a material to absorb and hold heat.  
Thermal capacity is measured in J/(g K). For example, the thermal capacity of water is 
4.187kJ/(kg K)  or  J/(g K). Thermal capacity is also defined as the amount of energy 
needed to raise the temperature of 1g sample by 1°C.  
 
 
3.7 Total Heat Content 
Bodies with great mass can store large quantities of heat, even at low temperatures. For 
example, thick masonry walls are slow to warm up in the heat of the day and slow to 
cool  down  during  a  cool  night. Also,  a  match  has high  temperature  and  little  heat 
content. A  large  tank  of  water  may be  at low  temperature  but  still  have large  heat 
content.  
 
 
 
3.8 Heat Transfer Theory 
Every body contains some internal energy. One component of internal energy is thermal 
(heat). Heat will transfer from one body to another if there is a temperature difference 
between  the  bodies. When  designing  an  agricultural  building, an  engineer  is  often 
required to accelerate or slow down heat transfer. Steady state (constant in time) heat 
transfer problems can usually be solved with relatively simple equations. Non-steady 
state (varies with time) heat transfer problems require more complicated solutions. 
 
3.8.1 Types of Sensible Heat Transfer 
 
There are three modes of sensible heat transfer: conduction, convection and radiation. 
 
3.8.1.1 Conduction 
 
In conduction, heat energy is passed from molecule to molecule in a material. For heat 
to be conducted it is essential that there be physical contact between particles and some 
temperature difference. Thermal conductivity is a measure of how easily heat is passed 

 
11 
 
from particle to particle. The rate of heat flow depends on the magnitude of temperature 
difference and the thermal conductivity of the material. 
 
You should take note that the thermal conductivity of a material is affected by density, 
size of fibres or particles, the degree of bonding between particles and their arrangement, 
moisture content, and temperature. The ability of many materials to conduct heat has 
been determined experimentally. 
 
        3.2 
 
q = heat conduction rate (W) 
A = cross-sectional area normal to the direction of heat flow (m2) 
k = thermal conductivity of material (W/m2 K) 
dt/dx = temperature gradient (K/m)  
 
The term k(dt/dx) is known as Fourier’s first law of conduction.  
 
The above equation shows us that the rate of heat conduction is directly proportional 
to: 
 The cross-sectional area, A; 
  The thermal conductivity of the substance, k; 
 The temperature gradient, dt/dx; and  
 Values of k vary considerably. 
 
It is worthy for us to know that metals have high thermal conductivities, the best being 
silver (k = 419 W/m 
o
C), copper (k = 388 W/m 
o
C), aluminium (k = 203 W/m 
o
C). Non-
metals have in general relatively low values of k, e.g. a cork has k = 0.04 W/m 
o
C and 
is often used as a heat insulator. 
 
 
Activity: Example 

 
12 
 
A small building has concrete walls 150 mm thick. If the thermal conductivity of the 
concrete is 1.1 W/m
 o
C, what is the rate of heat leakage through a wall 2.5 m high and 
5 m long when the inside temperature is 20
o
C and the outside temperature is 2
o
C? 
 
Let us begin by illustrating the information contained in the question. 
 
Figure 12. A single layered concrete wall 
 
Let us Equation 1 to solve the problem. From this equation, we have: 
푯=푯푯(
푯
푯
−푯
푯
푯
)=
푯.푯푯
푯°C
×푯.푯푯×푯푯
(
푯푯°C−푯°C
)
푯.푯푯푯
 
 
 
푯=푯푯푯푯 푯=푯.푯푯 푯푯 
 
 
Conduction through a composite wall 
 
You will agree that in many cases heat transfer involves more than one material. Let us 
consider a wall with three layers having a rate of heat transfer, Q passing through each 
layer. Here is our illustration for this:  
 
 
 
 

 
13 
 
 
Figure 13. A 3-D illustration of a composite wall 
 
From the 3-D illustration in Figure 13, we can extract a 2-D diagram that follows. You 
will notice that the 2-D diagram is the front view of the 3-D diagram. 
 
 
 
Figure 14. A 2-D illustration of a composite wall 
 
We can now, using respective notations presented in the Figure 14, write the equations 
that define the rate of heat transfer through each  of the three layers. The rate of heat 
transfer through the first layer is as follows: 
 
 
3.3 
 
Now,  we  can  define  the  equation  for  the  rate  of  heat  transfer  through  layer  two  as 
follows: 

 
14 
 
 
 
3.4 
 
Finally, we can define the rate of heat transfer through layer 3 as: 
 
 
3.5 
 
Using  the  equations  that  we  have  defined  above,  we  can  determine the  rates  of  heat 
transfer  through  each  of  the  three  layers  and  the  interface  and  surface  temperatures. 
You  will  agree  that  it  may  not  be  easy  for  us  to  accurately  measure  the  interface 
temperatures (t
2
 and t
3
) unless we have some sophisticated means of doing so. In view 
of this, it is usually unlikely that the interface temperatures are known while the outside 
temperatures are easily measured (known). We can compute the values of the interface 
temperatures by combining the three equations and simplify the result. The section that 
follows presents we can do this.  
 
The first step is to transpose equations (1), (2) and (3). To transpose the equations, we 
will group temperature terms together in each equation by bringing them to the left side 
of the equation. Equation 2 becomes: 
 
 
 
 
3.6 
 
 
while equation 3 is: 
 
 
 
 
3.7 
 

 
15 
 
 
and equation 4: 
 
 
 
3.8 
 
 
 
If we add equations (4), (5) and (6) we will have: 
 
 
 
3.9 
 
 
Making Q the subject of the formula gives us 
 
 
 
3.10 
 
 
Based  on  what  we  have  found  in  equation  9,  let  us  have  a  close  look  at  t
4
. You  will 
agree that t
4
 is the same as t
3+1
. The number of layers in the composite wall from which 
we  have  derived  the  equation  is  3.  This  implies  that  if the  number  of  layers,  3,  is 
replaced by n, the subscript for the latter temperature term would be t
n+1
. Hence for n 
layers, 
 
 
 
3.11 
 
 

 
16 
 
Example 
A  brick  wall  250  mm  thick  is  faced  with  concrete  50  mm  thick.  The  brick  has  a 
coefficient of thermal conductivity of 0.69 W/m  K while that of the concrete is 0.93 
W/m K. The temperature of the exposed brick face is 30
o
C and that of the concrete is 
5oC.  
Determine  the  heat  loss  per  hour  through  a  wall  10  m  long  and  5  m  high.  Find  the 
interface temperature. 
 
We can illustrate this problem as follows: 
 
 
Figure 15. A two layered (composite) wall 
 
a) We can find the rate of heat loss as follows: 
 
 
   
Heat lost per hour = 3.004 kJ/s x 3600 s/hr 
          = 10, 815 kJ/h 
 

 
17 
 
 
b) Now, let us find the interface temperature. We can do this using either the brick 
wall or the concrete.  
 
For the brick wall: 
 
        
 
Therefore,  
     t
2
 = t
1
 - (Qx
1
/k
1
A) 
         = 30 – (3004 x 0.25)/(0.69 x 50) =8.2
o
C 
 
Alternatively you  can use  the  concrete  to  get  the  same  answer  {i.e.  t
2
=  t
3
 +  (3004  x 
0.05)/(0.93 x 50) = 8.2
o
C} 
 
 
3.8.1.2 Convection 
 
You may recall that at ordinary temperatures most heat transfer in liquids and gases is 
by convection. In convection heat transfer, heat is transferred to or from an object by 
the  mass  movement  of  either  a  liquid  or  gas.  We  will  now  discuss  heat  transfer  by 
convection in more detail. 
 
 
3.8.1.2.1 Rate of heat transfer by convection 
 
You should note that the rate of heat flow depends on the temperature of the moving 
fluid and the rate of flow. Convection transfer can occur in any liquid or gas. There are 
many factors that influence the value of convective heat transfer. Due to that, it is almost 
impossible to determine individual effects of each of the factors by direct experimental 

 
18 
 
methods. 
 
You may be aware that the heat transfer rate per unit area is dependent on those physical 
properties which affect the flow pattern. These properties are as follows: 
 
 Fluid viscosity and density; 
 The specific heat capacity of the fluid; 
 The fluid’s thermal conductivity (thermal properties); 
 The linear dimension of the surface 
 The velocity of flow of the fluid over the surface; 
 The temperature difference; 
 The  factor  determining  the  natural  circulation  effect  caused  by  the  expansion  of  the 
fluid on heating; and 
 Acceleration due to gravity. 
 
Let us now define the rate of heat transfer by convection as follows: 
 
Equation 32 
 
where q
c
 = convective heat transfer rate (W) 
  h = heat transfer coefficient (W/m
2
. K) 
 A = surface area (m
2
) 
 t
s
 = surface temperature (K) 
  t = free stream fluid temperature (K) 
 
You should know that the laws  governing the  rate of heat transfer by convection are 
very  complex because  complex  fluid dynamic  phenomena  are  involved.  We  can 
determine the value of the heat transfer coefficient, h, from relationships that have been 
found experimentally. 
 
 
3.8.1.2.2 Radiation 
Classification of Heat Transfer by Convection 

 
19 
 
We  can classify  heat  transfer  by  convection  is  usually  classified  as  either natural or 
forced convection. Natural convection involves fluid motion resulting from differences 
in fluid density and the action of gravity while forced convection involves fluid motion 
created  by  a  fan  or  pump. You  should  note  that  heat  transfer  coefficients  for  natural 
convection are generally much lower than those for forced convection. 
Let us now discuss an example of heat transfer by natural convection between a cold 
fluid  and  a  hot surface. The  fluid  in  immediate  contact  with  the  surface  is  heated  by 
conduction, expands and becomes lighter, and rises due to the density differences. 
Forced convection heat transfer is determined by the flow conditions and by the fluid 
properties. The flow conditions may be laminar or turbulent and we can determine the 
flow  condition  using  the  Reynolds  number.  The  fluid  properties  in  question  include 
density and viscosity and can be determined using the Prandtl number. 
 
Under forced convection, the convection currents are sometimes assisted by means of 
a  pump  to  enhance  the  transfer  of  heat. For  example,  a  small  pump  is  set  up  in  the 
cooling system of motor vehicle engines to assist the convection currents. 
 
3.8.1.3 Radiation 
 
Let us now discuss heat transfer by radiation. The transfer of heat energy by radiation 
requires  no  transfer  medium.  Since  no  medium  is  required  for  the  heat  energy 
transmission,  the phenomenon is closely  allied  to  the  transmission  of  light  or  radio 
waves. 
 
A classic example of heat energy transmission by radiation is the transfer of heat energy 
from the sun to the earth. You should note that the temperature level of the emitting 
surface largely controls the quantity of the heat transmitted. 
 
We need to note that the amount of energy a body will emit or absorb by radiation is 
affected by whether its surface is dark or light. Radiant energy transfer follows the same 
laws as light. The laws are: 
 It is transmitted through space 
 It follows a straight-line path 

 
20 
 
 It can be reflected 
 It can be absorbed 
 It can produce a heating effect or be re-transmitted 
 
It is important for us to know that radiant energy must first be absorbed by a substance 
in  order  for  it to  be  converted  to  heat. Also,  heat  cannot  be  transmitted  by  radiation 
through an opaque material but is instead partially absorbed by and reflected from the 
surface depending on the nature of the body and the wavelength of the radiant energy. 
You should know that the atmosphere, glass and translucent materials pass a substantial 
amount of radiant energy while absorbing and reflecting some. A glass window pane is 
practically transparent to radiant energy from the sun but it is almost entirely opaque to 
radiation emitted at a longer wavelength by objects within an enclosure (green house 
effect). 
 
 
Prevost’s theory of exchanges 
 
We should note that a body emits radiation at a rate which is determined by the nature 
of  its  surface  and its temperature. The  body  will  absorb radiation  at  a  rate  which  is 
determined by the nature of its surface and the temperature of its surroundings. Radiant 
energy is transferred between two bodies in both directions and not just from a warmer 
to a cooler body. However, the net transfer is from warm to cool bodies.  
 
It  follows  that  if  the  surface  of  a  body  is  such  that the  body  is  a  good  absorber  of 
radiation, it must be an equally good emitter otherwise its temperature would rise above 
that of its surroundings. In particular, matt black surfaces are the best absorbers and the 
best  emitters  of  radiation;  highly  polished silver  surfaces  are  both  poor  emitters  and 
poor absorbers. 
 
Black Body Radiation 
You  may  be  aware  that  objects  vary  in  their  capacity  to  absorb,  reflect,  and  emit 
radiation. For example, if you put two objects (one shiny and the other one dark) made 
out of the same material under direct sunlight, the objects’ temperatures would rise at 

 
21 
 
different rates because of the different natures of solar radiation absorption, reflection 
and emission. A "black" body absorbs all radiation it receives and reflects none. It also 
emits  radiation  at  the  maximum  rate  for  a  given  temperature. However,  there  are  no 
true black bodies in life. Real (gray) bodies reflect some of the incoming radiation and 
emit heat at a rate less than that of a black body. Highly absorptive bodies generally 
radiate readily while highly reflective ones radiate poorly. An example of a body whose 
properties are close to those of a black body is a ball covered with lamp black. The ball 
will receive and emit radiation at a high rate. In contract, brightly polished aluminium 
is a good reflector, a poor absorber, and a poor radiator. 
 
Emissivity and Absorptivity 
 
From our discussion in the previous section, we can draw the lesson that all real objects 
do not absorb or emit all the radiation that is incident upon them. Using a black body 
as a reference, we can determine the fraction (or ratio) of incident radiation that gets 
absorbed or the fraction of the absorbed radiation that gets emitted from a given body 
relative to the absorption or emission of radiation by a black body. We will call these 
ratios absorptivity and emissivity. Absorptivity, α, is the fraction of incoming radiation 
that is absorbed. Emissivity, ε, is the ratio of the emissive power of a real body to that 
of a black body at the same temperature. 
  
We need to note that the emissivity and absorptivity of all real bodies are functions of 
absolute temperature and of the radiation wavelengths being absorbed or emitted. 
For  real  bodies, ε and α can  be  average  values  over  a  range  of  wavelengths  or  for  a 
specific wavelength. 
 
 Stefan-Boltzmann’s Law 
 
According to Stefan-Boltzmann, the total energy radiated per unit time per unit surface 
area of a black body is proportional to the fourth power of the temperature of the body 
expressed in Kelvin. We can use the Stefan-Boltzmann equation to calculate the total 
emissive power of a black body. The equation reads: 

 
22 
 
            3.12 
where  α = Stefan-Boltzmann constant, 5.67 × 10
-8
 Wm²K
4
 (a numerical constant of a 
perfect radiator); E
b
 = total emissive power of black body; T = absolute temperature 
 
From Equation 12, we can see that radiant heat transfer of a black body is proportional 
to the fourth power of the absolute temperature difference. You may recall that there 
are no true black bodies in life. We can, therefore, define the emissive power of a "gray" 
body as a fraction of the emissive power of a black body as follows:  
 
    3.13 
 where ε = emissivity 
 
We  can  find  the  net  heat, q
r
,  transferred  by  radiation  between  two  bodies  at 
temperatures T
1
 and T
2
, respectively, as:  
  
    3.14 
 
 
where A  =  Area; α =  Stefan-Boltzmann constant; F
E
 is  a  radiation  factor 
allowing for part of the radiation being re-radiated to the body it came from; F
A
 
is a geometric factor allowing for size, slope, and orientation of the two bodies 
 
 
 
3.9 Unit Summary 
In  this  unit,  we  have  covered heat transfer  and  temperature  measurement.  These  are 
important principles in our daily living because we encounter heat and heat transfer all 
the time. For example, we use solar energy to dry clothes, crops and animal feed. We 
also  take  temperature  measurements  in  both  human  and  livestock  housing  units  to 
ensure  that  our  living  environment  and  that  of  livestock  are  conducive  to  optimal 
productivity. Our knowledge of heat transfer will also help us understand heat transfer 

 
23 
 
processes that occur in farm equipment and machinery in order for us to operate and 
maintain them properly. 
 
 
3.10 Unit Test 
 
3.10.1 The specific heat capacity of water vapour is 2.01 x 10
3
 KJ/kg.K. How much 
energy  must  be  added  to  raise  the  temperature  of  1  gram  of  steam  from 
110.0°C to 120°C? 
3.10.2 A liquid whose mass is 600 kg occupies a volume of 0.5 m
3
 at a temperature 
of 20
o
C. What is its specific gravity (to 3 sig. figs), assuming that 2,000 liters 
of water at the same temperature weigh 1,982 kg?   
    
 
3.11 Suggested Answers to the Unit Test 
  
Here are the suggested answers for the Unit Test: 
 
Model Answer for Activity 2.10.1:   20.1 x 10
3 
J 
Model Answer for Activity 2.10.2:   1.2 
 
 
 
UNIT 4: THERMODYNAMICS 
4.0 Introduction 
In  Unit  2  and  3  you  were  introduced  to  heat  and  calorimetry.  The  concepts  acquired 
from these two units shall be greatly applied in this unit. I want to welcome you to this 
unit, where we shall continue to look on the relation between heat and work and discuss 
various aspects of thermodynamics. 
The science of thermodynamics was developed long before the atomic and molecular 
was accepted. It involves the description of matter in terms of macroscopic properties 
such as pressure, temperature, volume and heat flow. The laws of thermodynamics that 

 
24 
 
we shall discus in this unit are very important for our understanding of heat and energy 
flow. The first law of thermodynamics is an expression of the law of conservation of 
Energy.  The  second  law  of  thermodynamics  sets  limits  on  the  efficiency  of  the 
machines and processes that change one form of energy into another. 
 4.1 Objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 
 Describe parts of a thermodynamic system 
 Derive a characteristic gas equation 
 State the first and second law of thermodynamics 
 Apply the second law of thermodynamics in heat engines and refrigerators 
 Calculate coefficient of performance of a refrigerator 
 Key terms 
Ensure that you understand the key term phrases used in this unit as listed below. 
 Characteristic gas equation 
 Thermodynamics system 
 Thermodynamics state 
 Thermodynamic process 
 Thermodynamic cycle 
 Thermodynamic equilibrium 
 Heat engine 
 Phase 
 Entropy 
 Carnot Cycle 
 Refrigerator 
 Coefficient of performance 
 
 4.2 IDEAL/PERFECT GAS 
This is the gas, which obeys the gas laws at all values of temperature and pressure. 
Conditions of an ideal gas 
1. Molecules of an ideal gas are point masses 
2. There is no IMF between the molecules of an ideal gas. 
 
4.2.1 Gas laws 
BOYL’S LAW 
States that, the volume of a given mass of a gas at constant is inversely proportional to 
its pressure. 

 
25 
 
Or for a given mass of a gas at constant temperature, the product of its pressure and 
volume is constant 
PV = Constant or V α 1/P 
If pressure changes from P
1
 to P
2
 and the corresponding volume changes from V
1
 to 
V
2
 
Then P
1
V
1
 = P
2
V
2
 
 
CHALRES LAW 
At constant pressure, the volume of a given mass a gas increases with temperature at a 
nearly rate. 
Vα T or V/T = Constant  
PRESSURE LAW (GAY LUSSAC’S LAW) 
The pressure of a given mass of a gas is directly proportional to its absolute 
temperature at its absolute temperature at constant volume. 
PαT or P/T = Constant 
 
 
COMBINED GAS EQUATION  
If the amount of the gas is constant, then Boyle’s, Charles’ and Gay-Lussac’s Laws 
can be combined into one relationship.  
 
 
4.2.2 Characteristic gas equation 
Consider the combined gas equation 
 
 
 
 
We usually call the equation PV = nRT, the Characteristic 
gas equation. Where n is the number of moles and R is the universal 
gas constant (8.31J/mol/K). 
 Activity 1 

 
26 
 
An automobile tyre is filled to a gas pressure of 200 K pa at 10°C. After driving 100km, 
the temperature within the tire rises to 40°C. What is the pressure within the tyre now?  
4.3 Thermodynamics 
We define thermodynamics as the study of heat and its transformation to   mechanical 
energy. It is a branch of Physics that deals with the relationship between heat and work. 
In  thermodynamics  we  usually  encounter  the  following  terms;  system,  surrounding, 
boundary and universe. 
4.3.1 Classification of thermodynamic systems 
Open System: a system in which both mass and energy can cross the boundary. 
Closed System: One in which mass does not cross boundaries of the system, but allows 
energy to pass through 
Isolated System: one in which neither mass nor energy crosses the boundaries of the 
system. 
 
 
4.3.2 Thermodynamic properties 
Property 
It is defined as any measurable or observable characteristics of the substance when the 
system   remains   in   equilibrium   state.   (i.e.)   pressure,   temp,   density,   volume, 
Energy, specific volume. 
Intensive property 
A property, whose value does not depend on the mass of the system is referred to as 
intensive  property,  like temperature,  pressure,  density,  specific  volume,  etc.  These 
properties are independent on the mass of the system and they are constant.  
Extensive property 

 
27 
 
One whose value depends on the mass of the system, like volume, total Energy, etc. 
4.3.3 Control Volume and Control Surface 
Control Volume: a specified large number thermal device that has mass flow in and out 
of a system called as Control volume.  
Control Surface: A system in which both mass and energy can cross the boundary of a 
control volume is called control surface  
4.3.4 Categories of thermodynamic systems 
Phase:  A  phase  is  a  quantity  of  matter  that  is  homogeneous  throughout  in  chemical 
composition and physical structure. 
Adiabatic system: An adiabatic system is one, which is thermally insulated from its 
surroundings.  It  can  ever,  exchange  work  with  its  surroundings.  If  it  does  not,  it 
becomes an isolated system 
Homogeneous system: a system which consists of a single phase (i.e.) mixture of air 
and water vapour, water plus nitric acid.  
Heterogeneous  system:  a  system  that  consists  of  two  or  more phases  is  called 
a heterogeneous system (i.e.) water plus steam, ice plus water, water plus oil.  
4.3.5 A thermodynamic path and process 
Any change a system undergoes from one equilibrium state to another is known as a 
process. We shall now define a thermodynamic path as a series of states through which 
a system passes during a process. 
  
A Cycle 
A system is said to have undergone a cycle if it returns to its original state at the end of 
the process. Thus, for a CYCLE, the initial and the final states are identical.  
Property A 
State 1 
State 2 
Property B
 
Path 
State 1 
State 2 

 
28 
 
 
4.3.5.1 Thermodynamic Processes 
Isothermal process: temperature is constant. 
Isobaric process: pressure is constant 
Isochoric process: volume is constant 
Adiabatic process: no heat enters or leaves the system. 
Isenthalpic process: enthalpy is constant 
Isentropic process: entropy is constant 
Property A 
State 1 
State 2 
Property B
 

 
29 
 
   
 
4.3.5.2 Reversible and irreversible process 
Reversible  process:  Process  that  can  be  reversed  without  leaving  any  trace  on  the 
Surroundings. i.e. Both, System and Surroundings are returned to their initial states at 
the  end  of  the  Process.  This  is  only  possible  when  net  Heat  and  net  Work  Exchange 
between the system and the surroundings is ZERO for the Process.  
Irreversible process: Most of the Processes in nature are irreversible, i.e. Having taken 
place,  they  cannot  reverse  themselves  spontaneously  and  restore  the  System  to  its 
original State.  
4.3.6 Thermodynamic Equilibrium 
Thermal Equilibrium - The temperature of the system does not change with time and 
has  same  value  at  all  points  of  the  system.  Under  thermal  equilibrium,  there  is  no 
transfer of heat. 
Pressure (P)
 
Volume (V) 
V=Const 
Isochoric 
P=Const 
Isobaric 
Temperature (T)
 
Enthalpy (h)/ Entropy (s) 
T=Const 
Isothermal 
h=Const 
Isenthalpic 
s=Const 
Isentropic 

 
30 
 
Mechanical Equilibrium - There are no unbalanced forces within the system or between 
the surroundings. The pressure in the system is same at all points and does not change 
with respect to time. 
 Chemical  Equilibrium - No  chemical  reaction  takes  place  in  the  system  and  the 
chemical composition that is same throughout the system does not vary with time. 
Phase  equilibrium – Occurs  to  a  system  having  more  than  one  phase.  Mass  of  each 
phase is in equilibrium   
Activity 2 
Explain the relationship between an isobaric process and mechanical equilibrium. 
4.4 Zeroth law of Thermodynamics 
We  have  seen  in  section  4.3.6  that  in  thermal  equilibrium  there  is  no  heat  transfer 
between or among the substances in contact. In Zeroth law we are simply applying the 
principal of heat transfer under thermal equilibrium. 
Zeroth law states that, “If two bodies are in Thermal Equilibrium with the third body, 
then they are also in Thermal Equilibrium with each other.” 
For instance, if A is in thermal equilibrium with B, and B is in thermal equilibrium with 
C, then A and C are in thermal equilibrium with each. Zeroth law serves as a basis of 
validity for temperature measurement in science. 
 
 4.5 First law of thermodynamics 
You  may  recall  from  unit  5  in  Physics  module  1,  that  we  discussed  the  law  of 
conservation of energy. The first law of thermodynamics is the application of the law 
of conservation of energy to thermal systems. The law states that: 
“Whenever heat is added to a system, it transforms to an equal amount of some other 
forms of energy.”  
A 
25 ºC 
25 ºC 25 ºC 
B 
C 

 
31 
 
We may alternatively define the first law as 
“The change in internal energy of a system is equal to heat added to the system minus 
the work done by system.” 
             4.1
 
You may deduce from this law that whenever you add heat to a system, it will be turned 
into internal energy of the system or it will do some work. 
In order to avoid confusion of signs when dealing with the first law of thermodynamics 
we are going to summarize all sign conversion in a table. 
VARIABLES SIGNS 
Work done by the system Negative [- ve] 
Work done on the system Positive  [+ ve] 
Heat released by the system Negative [+ ve] 
Heat added to the system Positive [+ ve] 
Increase in internal energy Positive [+ ve] 
Decrease in internal energy Negative [- ve] 
 
Example 
If 60J of work is done on a gas and the gas loses 150J of heat to its surroundings. 
What is the change in internal energy?  
Solution: 
60J of work is done on the system, and then work done is positive (+W) 
W = 60J 
150J of heat is released by the system, and then heat in the system is negative (- Q), Q 
= - 150J 
 
Δ U = - 150 + 60J = - 90J 
Application of the first law of thermodynamics 
We want to apply the first law of thermodynamics to some simple processes.  
Limitations of the first law of thermodynamics 
1. It does not indicate the direction of transfer of heat 
Does not explain why heat cannot flow from cold to hot 
2. It does not tell anything about the conditions under which heat can be converted into 
work 

 
32 
 
3. It does not tell why the whole of heat energy cannot be converted into mechanical 
work continuously. 
Activity 3 
A gas starts with 400J of internal energy. When 360J of heat is added to the gas, the 
gas does 140J of work. What is the final internal energy?  
 4.6 Second law of thermodynamics 
Having discovered shortfalls in the first law of thermodynamics, scientists came up 
with a more clear explanation on heat transfer. The second law of thermodynamics 
stipulates that, “Heat flows naturally from a hot body to a cold body; heat will never 
of itself flow from a cold body to a hot body.” 
Or “When work is done by a heat engine, running between two temperatures, T
H
 
(Hot) and T
L 
(cold), only some of the input energy at T
H
 can be converted to work 
otherwise the rest is rejected as heat at T
L
.” 
 
4.6.1 Kelvin-Plank and Clausius statements  
a) Kelvin-Planck Statement 
“It is impossible to construct a system which when operating in a cycle will extract heat 
energy from a single source and do an equal amount of work on the surroundings”.Ie 
never possible to achieve 100% thermal efficiency 
b) Clausius Statement 
“It is impossible to construct a device which when operating in a cycle has no other 
effect than the transfer of heat energy from a cool to a hotter body”.Ie some work is 
done on or by the working fluid to the surroundings or vice versa. 

 
33 
 
4.4.2 Entropy 
May be defined in the following ways: 
We may define entropy in a number of ways: It is the measure of the disorderliness of 
a system. Alternatively 
Entropy is the measure of the amount of energy, which is unavailable to do work. 
Is a state variable whose change whose change is defined for a reverse process at T 
where Q is heat absorbed 
Entropy (S) = Heat absorbed (Q) / Temperature (T)  
The 2
nd
 Law of Thermodynamics says that during any process: 
 S
universe 
=   S
system
 +   S
surroundings
    0       4.2 
Change in entropy 
When a system goes from state one to state two, its entropy changes by the same 
amount ΔS, whether a hypothetical reversible path is followed or a real irreversible 
path is taken. 
 
4.4.3 HEAT ENGINES 
A heat engine is a device that converts heat into mechanical work 
Characteristics of Heat Engines: 
1.They receive the Heat from High-Temp Reservoir ( i.e. Source ) 
2.They convert part of this Heat to Work  
3.They reject the remaining Heat to Low-Temp Reservoir ( i.e. Sink ) 
They operate on a CYCLE.  
Heat Engines are generally Work – Producing devices,  

 
34 
 
e.g. Gas Turbines, I.C. Engines, Steam Power Plants, etc. 
 
 
 
 
Efficiency of a heat engine 
Is the ratio of the work done (W) to the input Heat (Q
in
 ) at higher temperature  
           4.5 
           4.6
 
          4.7
 
 
A Carnot cycle consist of two reversible adiabatic and two isothermal processes 
operating between temperature T
H
 and T
C
 
HEAT  ENGINE : 
High 
Temp 
Low 
Temp 
Qin 
Qout 
Heat Engine 
Wnet 
          
4.3 
          
4.4 
 
 

 
35 
 
 
4.4.4 CARNOT CYCLE 
The very best theoretically possible heat engine is the Carnot engine. The efficiency 
of a Carnot engine depends on the temperature of the hot and cold reservoirs. 
 
       
 
 
 
Consider the following two equations 
for efficiency of Carnot engine 
          4.8 
          4.9 
Equating equations 4.8 and 4.9 we have 
 
                    4.10 
 
!!Kelvins!in  measured be 
must res temperatuThe :Note
1
hot
cold
Carnot
T
T
e

 
36 
 
Example 
A carnot engine absorbs 1000J of heat from a reservoir at 127°C and rejects 600J 
during each cycle. Calculate 
a. Efficiency of the engine 
b. The temperature of the sink 
c. The amount of useful work done in each cyle 
Solution: 
Lets first identify what we have from the given information; 
Q
H
 = 1000J,  Q
C
 = 600J, T
H
 = 127°C. 
Since all temperatures must be in Kelvin, we have to convert 127°C to Kelvin 
T
H 
= 127 + 273 = 400K 
a. Efficiency of the engine 
Since we have Q
H
 and Q
C
, we are going to apply equation number 4.7: 
 
= 1 – 0.6 
η = 0.4 or 40% 
 
b. Temperature of the sink T
L
 
Here we are going to use equation 4.10 
 
 
T
L
 =  = 240K or -33°C 
 
c. Useful work  
We will use equation 4.4 
W = Q
H
 - Q
L
 
W = 1000J – 600J = 400J 
 
 

 
37 
 
Types of Engines 
External combustion Engine: the one in which the working substance is produced 
by burning the fuel outside the cylinder, E.g. steam engine 
Internal combustion engine: fuel is burned inside the cylinder e.g. petrol engine 
Activity 4
1. A glass rod is heated and then blown by a glassblower.  When it is at 185°C it is 
brought outside to cool.  3200 J of heat are transferred from the glass to the air, which 
is at 18°C.  Find the change in entropy of the universe.  
2. A Carnot absorbs 1000J of heat from a reservoir at 127°C and rejects 600J of heat 
during each cycle. Calculate 
a. The efficiency of the engine  
b. The temperature of the sink  
c. The amount of useful work done during each cycle 
 
 4.5 REFRIGERATOR 
A refrigerator is a heat engine running in reverse 
It transfers heat from a colder body (sink) to a hotter body (source). 
This is achieved by doing work on the refrigerator 

 
38 
 
 
 
4.5.1 Coefficient of Performance (COP) 
Performance of a refrigerator is measured by its coefficient of performance. 
Coefficient of Performance of a refrigerator is the ratio of heat extracted per cycle at 
low temperature to the work input required. 
                    4.11 
But we saw in equation 4.4 that: W = Q
L
 - Q
L 
if make we substitute for W in equation 
4.11, we get 
                   4.12 
Sometimes  we  calculate  coefficient  of  performance  of  a  refrigerator,  using  sink  and 
source temperatures. In this case quantities in equation 4.12 are represented in terms of 
Compressor 
Condenser 
Evaporator 
Expansion  
Valve 
Wnet, in 
Surrounding Air 
Refrigerated Space 
Q
H
 
Q
L
 
[T
H]
 Warm  
Environment 
W
net
  
Q
H
  
Q
L
  
Refrigerator 
Refrigerated  
Space [T
L
] 

 
39 
 
their corresponding temperatures, thus T
L
 for Q
L
 and T
H
 for Q
H
 as shown in equation 
4.13. 
                              4.13 
Example 
A farm shop refrigerator has a coefficient of performance of 6. If the room temperature 
outside  the  refrigerator  is  30°C,  what  is  the  lowest  temperature  that  can  be  obtained 
inside the refrigerator. 
Solution 
The easier way to solve this problem is to know the right equation to be used by first 
identifying  given  terms  and  missing  terms.  In  our  case  we  are  given  COP  =  6  and 
temperature outside the refrigerator T
H
. We have been asked to calculate (are missing) 
the temperature inside the refrigerator T
L
. 
In this case we are going to apply equation 4.13, 
 
 
1818K - 6T
L
 = T
L 
7T
L
 = 1818K 
T
L
 = 260K. 
Activity 5 
A  household  refrigerator  has  a  coefficient  of  performance  of  6.0.  If  the  room 
temperature outside the refrigerator is 30°C, what is the lowest temperature that can be 
obtained inside the refrigerator?  
 
4.6 Practice Activity 
An Agricultural Economist wants to buy a very effective refrigerator for Bunda farm 
shop. On the market there are two models of refrigerators. Model A works between -
10°C  and  27°C  while  model  B  works  between -27°C  and  17°C.  Both  A  and  B  can 
remove 2000J of heat  from the freezer. Which refrigerator should she buy and why? 
(Show your working)   

 
40 
 
 
4.7 Unit summary 
In  this  unit  we  have  discussed  important  concepts  in  the  transformation  of  heat  to 
mechanical   energy.   Pressure,   temperature,   volume,   enthalpy   and   entropy   are 
parameters that are involved in the transformation of heat. This transformation follows 
a particular thermodynamic process which takes a specific path. 
Unit Test 
1. In a refrigerator, heat from inside at 277K is transferred to a room at 300K. How 
many joules of heat shall be delivered to the room for each joule for each joule 
of electrical energy consumed ideally?      
2. What amount of work has to be done in converting 1kg of water into steam at 
100°C and normal atmospheric pressure? [The volume of 1 kg of water at 100°C 
is 10
-3
 m
3
 and that of 1 kg of steam is 1.671m and the normal pressure is 10
5
 
Nm
-2
.    
3. Calculate the change in internal energy of a block of copper of mass 200g when 
it  is  heated  from  25°C  to  75°C.  Assume  the  change  in  volume  is  negligible. 
Specific heat of copper is 0.1/g/K       
4. 1.0 m
3
 of water is converted into 1671 m
3
 of steam at atmospheric and 100°C 
temperature. The latent heat of vaporization of water is 2.3 × 10
6
 J/kg. If 2.0 kg 
of water is converted into steam at atmospheric pressure and 100°C temperature, 
then how much will be the increase in its internal energy? [Density of water = 
1×10
3
 kg m
-3
 and atmospheric pressure = 1.01×10
5
 Nm
-2
].     
5. What  amount  of  heat  must  be  supplied  to  2×10
-2
 kg  of  nitrogen  (at  room 
temperature)  to  raise  its  temperature  by  45°C at  constant  pressure  (molecular 
mass of N
2
 = 28; R=8.3J/mol/K; C
P
 = 3.5R)         
6. Let temperatures T
1
 and T
2
 of the two heat reservoirs in the ideal Carnot engine 
be 1500°C and 500°C respectively. Which of these, increasing T
1
 by 100°C or 
decreasing T
2
 by 100°C, would result in a greater improvement in the efficiency 
of the engine? 

 
41 
 
7. Calculate the efficiency of the Carnot engine working between the steam point 
and ice point.                                                                                
8. A Carnot engine whose low temperature reservoir is at 7°C, has an efficiency 
of 50%. It is desired to increase the efficiency to 70%. By how many degrees, 
the temperature of the high-temperature reservoir is increased?                                                                                                    
 
 Suggested Answers to Unit Activities 
Activity 1 
232 Pa. 
Activity 2 
They both occur at constant pressure 
Activity 3 
620 J. 
Activity 4 
1. 4J/K 
2. a.) 40%               b.) 240K                  c.) 400J   
Activity 5 
260 K 
Practice Activity 
She should buy refrigerator A. Refrigerator A has a high coefficient of performance 
than refrigerator B, hence more effective. 
Unit Test 
1. 13J 
2. 1.670 x 10
5
J 
3. 4200J 
4. 4.263 x 10
6
 J 
5. 934 J 
6. Decreasing the temperature by 100°C 
7. 26.81% 
8. 373.3K  
 

 
42 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
UNIT 5: ELECTRICITY AND MAGNETISM 
5.0 Introduction 
Before the fifteenth century, man used other sources energy for lighting, cooking and 
even  production.  There  was  little Electrical  phenomena  have  been  studied  since 
antiquity;  though  progress  in  theoretical  understanding  remained  slow  until  the 
seventeenth  and  eighteenth  centuries.  Even  then,  practical  applications  for  electricity 
were few, and it would not be until the late nineteenth century that engineers were able 
to put it to industrial and residential use. The rapid expansion in electrical technology 
at  this  time  transformed  industry  and  society.  Electricity's  extraordinary  versatility 
means    it    can    be    put    to    an    almost    limitless    set    of    applications    which 

 
43 
 
include transport, heating, lighting, communications, agriculture and computation. 
Electrical power is now the backbone of modern industrial society. 
 
 5.1 Objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 
 Describe the structure of an atom in relation to static and current electricity 
 Differentiate static electricity from current electricity 
 Design parallel and series circuits 
 Apply Kirchhoff’s rules in circuit analysis 
 Explain the applications of Faraday’s law 
  
 Key terms 
Ensure that you understand the key term phrases used in this unit as listed below: 
 Charge 
 Circuit 
 Kirchhoff’s rules 
 Lenz law 
 Ohms law 
 Magnetic flux 
 Faraday’s law 
 Transformers 
 Magnetic field 
 Electric Field
 
 5.2 Atomic Structure 
As  you  have  learnt  from  secondary  school  physical  science,  an  atom  is  made  up  of 
neutrons, protons and electrons. Electrons are found in the outer most shells and have 
a negative charge and a negligible mass. Protons and neutrons are found at the center 
of an atom. Protons are positively charged and have a unit mass. Neutrons have a zero 
charge and a unit mass. Figure 5.1 is shows a structure of an atom. 

 
44 
 
 
Figure 5.1: Atomic Structure 
Activity 1 
Explain how does the position of electrons and protons in an atom affect their 
movement when conducting current. 
 
 5.3 Electric Charge and Fields 
In most cases you wonder when you see sparks or hear a sparkling sound when 
putting off nylon clothes. In this case, the sparks are the result of transfer of electric 
charges. 
 
5.3.1 Electric Charge  
We  shall  define  electric  charge  as  the  intrinsic  characteristic  of  the  fundamental 
particles making up insulators. Electricity in insulators is transferred through negative 
charge  carriers (electrons)  and  positive  charge  carriers  (protons).  An  insulator  that 
increases the number of charges by getting extra positive charges becomes positively 
charged. On the contrary, an insulator that has a deficit of positive charges (has more 
electrons that protons) is considered as negatively charged. 
The SI Unit for electric charge is a Coulomb (C). Q or q represents electric charge. 
 
5.3.2 Electric Field 
When  you rub  your pen  against  your hair and bring it close to a heap of small small 
pieces  of  papers, a  pen  attracts  pieces  of  paper;  hence  they  jump  to  the  pen.  But  the 

 
45 
 
attraction forces excreted on the pieces of paper by the pen depend on pen’s distance 
from the pieces of papers. This illustrates to us that it is only within a certain distance 
that pieces of papers  will jump to the pen. The  area  around  an  electric charge  where 
electrostatic forces are experienced is referred to as an electric field. 
We represent the intensity of an electrostatic field at any point as force per unit charge. 
Mathematically is given as in equation 5.1 
           5.1 
The SI Unit for electric field intensity is Newton per coulomb or volts per meter; N/C 
or V/m. 
Example 1 
Find the magnitude of the force acting on a 2.5 C charge, placed in an electric field with 
an intensity of 10N/C. 
Solution: 
Here we have Q = 2.5C, E = 10N/C and F =? 
To work out F we have to make F subject of the formula in equation 5.1 
Then F = EQ = 2.5 C x 10N/C = 25N. 
Activity 2 
Calculate the value of the magnetic field intensity, given that a force of 0.02N is being 
exerted on a 10μC charge 
 5.4 Coulomb’s Law 
Coulomb’s  law  is  sometimes  defined  as  the  inverse  square  law.  It  describes  the 
relationship  between  the  force  of  attraction  between  two  or  more  charges  and  the 
distance between them. We state coulomb’s law as: 
“The  electrostatic  force  (F)  between  two  point  charges  (q
1
)  and  (q
2
)  is  directly 
proportional to the product of the two charges and inversely proportional to the square 
of the distance (r) between their centres.” 
We can express Coulomb’s law mathematically as shown in equation 5.2 
 
         5.2 

 
46 
 
Example 2 
Calculate the value of two equal changes if they repel each other with a force of 0.1 N 
when situated at 50 cm apart in vacuum.  
Solution: 
To successfully solve this problem we have to first identify what we have: 
F = 0.1N; r = 50 cm; k = 9 x 10 
9
 C
2
/N/m
2
; q
1
 = q
2
 =? 
Lets convert 50cm to meters, which is 50/100 = 0.5 m 
Now we are going to apply equation 5.2 
 
let us now substitute the given values 
  
But we are told in the question that and we can equate this to , then 
, then  
 
Making q the subject of the formula, we have: 
 
or  
Activity 3 
 
5. 5 Resistivity and Conductivity 
Resistivity 
Resistivity is the measure of how strong a conductor resist the flow of electric current. 
The SI unit of resistivity is ohm-meter (Ωm). Equation 5.3 shows an equation for 
resistivity: 

 
47 
 
          5.3 
Where, R is resistance of the conductor 
 A is the cross-sectional area of the conductor 
 l is the length of the conductor and 
 ρ is the resistivity of a conductor 
 
Conductivity 
Conductivity is the inverse (opposite) of resistivity. We may define conductivity as the 
measure of how well a metal allows the flow of current. Conductivity is measured in 
Ω
-1
m
-1
. 
In this case we may deduce that the higher the resistivity of a conductor the lower the 
conductivity. Mathematically is represented as shown in equation 5.4. 
 
          5.4 
 Activity 4 
A metal rod is 2m in long and 8mm in diameter. Compute its resistance if the resistivity 
of the metal is 1.76 x 10
-8
 Ωm. 
 5.6 Electric Current 
Each time we hear the term electric current; our mind begins to visualize a number of 
electrical appliances (bulbs, electric iron, a kettle, a cooker, radio cassettes, etc.) that 
we have ever handled in our lives. You may recall from your secondary school physical 
science  that  electrons  in  insulators  localized  (stationary)  and  hence  cannot  produce 
electric  current  but  rather  static  electricity.  On  the  contrary,  electrons  in  metals  are 
delocalized (move randomly). When a cell is connected to a conductor the free moving 
electrons in a wire align themselves and flow uniformly in one specified direction. The 
uniform flow of electric current is known as electric current. 
You may also express electric current as the rate of change of electric charge. Electric 
current is measured in Coulomb per second (Coulomb/s) or Amperes (A). Relation 5.5 
shows an equation for electric current. 

 
48 
 
           5.5 
5.6.1 Ohms Law 
Ohms law describes the relationship among current, voltage and resistance in a 
circuit. Ohms law may be stated in a variety of ways but all meaning the same thing. 
In this section we shall define Ohms law as: 
“The potential difference across a conductor is directly proportional to the current 
passing through the conductor.” 
Or, “Voltage is equal to the product of resistance and current.” 
          5.6 
 
5.6.2 Ohms Law and Resistance 
Resistance is the opposition to the flow of electric current and is measured in Ohms. 
The behavior of current, voltage and resistance in circuit depends on the arrangement 
of each circuit. We can arrange our circuit as a parallel circuit or a series circuit. 
 
5.6.3 Series Circuit 
When you connect three resistors connected as shown in figure 5.2, the following facts 
follow: 
 
FIGURE 5.2 
Facts on Series Resistors 
1. Current is the same through all resistors 
2. Total voltage (PD) = sum of individual voltages (pds): V = V
1
+ V
2
+ V
3
 
3. Individual   potential   difference   (voltage)   is   directly   proportional   to   individual 
resistances V
1
=IR
1
, V
2
= IR
2
, V
3
= IR
3
 
4. Total resistance is greater than individual resistance. R=V/I = R
1
+R
2
+R
3
 
5. Total resistance = sum of individual resistances  

 
49 
 
5.6.4 Parallel Circuit 
Facts on Parallel Resistors 
1. Potential difference (voltage) is the same across each resistor. 
V = V
1
 = V
2
 = V
3 
 or V = I
1
R
1
 = I
2
R
2
 = I
3
R
3
 
2. Total current = sum of individual currents 
i.
 I = I
1
+ I
2 
+I
3
 +
 
3. Individual currents inversely proportional to individual resistances 
4. Effective resistance less than least individual resistance 
i. I/V = 1/R
 
= 1/R
1
 + 1/R
2
 + 1/R
3
 
Example 
A farmer designed a simple circuit for his chicken kraal. The arrangement of resistors 
in his circuit is shown in figure 5.6. If R1 = 3Ω, R2 = 9Ω, R3 = 12Ω and R4 = 6Ω. 
Find the value of current passing through R1. 
 
Solution: 
We first of all should find the effective resistance of the parallel arrangement, 
Effective resistance: 
1/R
T
 = 1/3+1/9+1/12                             
         = (12+4+3)/36                          
         = 19/36                                     
    R
T
 = 36/19 = 1.9Ω 
Then we will consider series resistors:  1.9 Ω                     
R
net
 = 1.9+6 =7.9 Ω 
 
Total current will be given by 

 
50 
 
I = V/R 
  = 6/7.9 
  = 0.76A 
But we know that voltage in series is divided, then 6V will shared between a R4 
resistor and the set of 3 parallel resistors. In this case let us find the voltage across a 
3Ω resistor. 
V
R4 
= IR = 0.76A x 6Ω = 4.56V 
Then voltage across a set of parallel resistors will simply be the difference between 
circuit voltage (6V) and voltage across R4. 
V
Across a set of parallel resistors 
= 6V – 4.56V = 1.44V 
At this point we know that voltage across parallel resistors is the same, thus R1, R2 
and R3 are all 1.44V. 
Finally, it will be easier to calculate the value of current passing through R1, since we 
know the values of voltage (1.44V) and resistance (3Ω). 
 
 
5.6.5 Electrical Power 
You may recall that electrical power is the product of voltage and current. We usually 
use Ohms law to derive at other equations of power. The SI unit for power is Watt 
(W) 
P = VI 
P = I
2
R 
P = V
2
/R 
 
 5.7 Potential Difference and Internal Resistance  
The potential difference is the work done in moving a unit charge from one point to 
another. In every cell there is some resistance 

 
51 
 
 
W = QV = ItV 
To calculate power generated by the source: 
EI = I
2
r + I
2
R 
Dividing both sides by I 
E = Ir + IR 
E = I ( r + R) 
Making I subject 
I = E/(R+r) 
PD across AB: V
AB
 = E – Ir = IR 
Then V
AB
 = IR = [E/(R+r)] R 
 
5.7.1 Potential Divider Rule 
In order to find the voltage of a single resistor amongst several resistors connected in 
parallel, we apply potential divider rule.  
 
I = V
0
/R = V
0
/ (R
1
+R
2
)....... 1 
V
1
 = IR
1 
........................... 2 
Sub. Eqn 1 into 2 

 
52 
 
V
1
 = R
1
V
0
/(R
1
+R
2
) 
 
 5.8 Kirchhoff’s Rules 
5.8.1 KIRCHOFF’S JUNCTION RULE 
It’s also known as Kirchhoff's current rule 
States that, “the sum of the currents entering any junction must be equal to the sum 
of currents leaving the junction.” 
Alternatively can be defined as, the algebraic (net) sum of the currents at a junction 
is zero 
 
I
1
 = I
2
 + I
3
 or ΣI = 0.      
Its applied in case where we have more than one loop 
Junction rule is based on the conservation of charge 
FACTS ON KCL 
1. If the direction of the loop is in the same direction of the current, current is positive 
2. If the direction of the loop is in the opposite direction to current, current is negative 
3. The direction of the loop should be the same in every loop 
5.8.2 KIRCHHOFF’S VOLTAGE RULE 
States that, the algebraic sum of voltages around a closed circuit loop is zero. 
Σ V = 0 
FACTS ON KVL 
1. If the direction of the loop moves from positive to negative side o0f a cell, V is 
negative 
2. If the direction of the loop moves from positive to negative side of the loop 
3. The direction of the loop should be same in every loop  
 Activity 5 
Find the value of I
1
, I
2
 and I
3 
in figure 5.8 

 
53 
 
 
 5.9 Electric and magnetic Fields 
5.9.1 Magnetic Fields 
A region where magnetic forces are experienced 
  B = F
B
 / qv 
  F
B
 = B|q|v 
If we have an angle between φ B and V then 
   F
B
 = B×|q|× v × sin φ 
Where B = Magnetic field 
             F
B
 = Magnetic force 
             q = Charge 
             V = velocity 
SI unit of B is Tesla (T) 
 
5.9.2 Magnetic Properties of Matter 
Diamagnetic substances: substances in which the magnetic moment is weak and 
opposite the applied magnetic field. 
Paramagnetic substances: substances in which the magnetic moment is weak and in 
the same direction as the applied magnetic field. 
Ferromagnetic substances: interaction between atoms cause magnetic moments to 
align and create a strong magnetization that remains after the external field is 
removed.  
5.9.3 Electromagnetism 

 
54 
 
Magnetic forces created due to the flow of current in a conductor. The magnetic force 
is affected by the magnitude of current and the number of turns in a coil. 
Magnetic Field Pattern Round a Flat Coil 
A solenoid is obtained by increasing the number of turns of a flat coil. The resulting 
magnetic field pattern of a solenoid resembles that of a bar magnet. 
 
Magnetic field pattern around a straight wire  
The resulting magnetic field lines form concentric circles around the wire. 
 
The Right-Hand Grip rule can be used to predict the direction of the magnetic field. 
 
5.9.4 Magnetic Flux and Faraday’s Law of  Induction 

 
55 
 
5.9.4.1 Induced Electromotive Force 
Faraday’s experiment: closing the switch in the primary circuit induces a current in 
the secondary circuit, but only while the current in the primary circuit is changing. 
 
The current in the secondary circuit is zero as long as the current in the primary circuit, 
and therefore the magnetic field in the iron bar, is not changing. 
Current flows in the secondary circuit while the current in the primary is changing. It 
flows in opposite directions depending on whether the magnetic field is increasing or 
decreasing. 
The magnitude of the induced current is proportional to the rate at which the magnetic 
field is changing. 
 

 
56 
 
 
5.9.4.2 Magnetic Flux (Φ) 
Φ = ABCos θ 
The SI unit is 1T.m
2
 or Weber (Wb) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Magnetic flux is used in the 
calculation of the induced emf. 
 
Faraday’s law of Induction 
Faraday’s law: An electromotive force (E) is induced only when the magnetic flux  
(Φ) through a loop changes with time (t). 
which can be presented as 
 
 
5.9.4.3 Lenz law 
Lenz law is a law that is applied in generating electromotive force. It relates the 
direction of current and the magnetic flux that causes it. Lenz law states that,  
“An induced current always flows in a direction that opposes the change that caused 
it.” 

 
57 
 
For  instance,  if  we  have  a  bar  magnet  and  a  conductor  carrying  current  as  shown  in 
figure  5.7,  When  the  magnetic  field  is  increasing,  the  magnetic  field  created  by  the 
induced current will be in the opposite direction; if decreasing, it will be in the same 
direction.  
 
5.9.4.4 Electric and Magnetic Fields 
There is a direct relationship between magnetic field (B) and an electric field (E). We 
now want to consider equations of electric and magnetic fields and establish their 
relationship. 
Electric Force: F
e
 = qE 
Magnetic Force: F
B
 = qvB 
At equilibrium in a conductor having both E and B fields: F
e
 = F
B
 
Thus qE = qvB 
Making q subject: 
E = Bv 
 5.10 Generators and Motors 
5.10.1 Generators 
An  electric  generator  converts  mechanical  energy  into  electric  energy.  An  outside 
source of energy is used to turn the coil, thereby generating electricity. 
 

 
58 
 
 
5.10.2 Electric Motors 
An electric motor is exactly the opposite of a generator – it uses the torque on a 
current loop to create mechanical energy. 
 
 5.11 Transformers 
A transformer is used to change voltage in an alternating current from one value to 
another. 
 

 
59 
 
By applying Faraday’s law of induction to both coils, we can come up with 
transformer equations: 
 
Where V is voltage, N is number of turns, p is primary circuit, and s is secondary 
circuit. 
The power in both circuits must be the same; therefore, if the voltage is lower, the 
current must be higher. 
 
Activity 
 
5.5 Practice activity 
 5.6 Unit summary 
Unit Test 
Suggested Answers to unit Activities 
 
UNIT 6: LIGHT, OPTICS AND OPTICAL INSTRUMENTS 
6.0 Introduction 
What do you see in front of you? We are all able to see just because of light. You can 
verify this at night in a dark place; most of us would fail to see anything in the dark. 
Light and optical instruments enable us to see very small things, things very far away 
and things hidden inside other objects. In this unit we shall be discussing the elementary 
principles of light, optics and optical instruments. 
 6.1 Objectives 
By the end of this unit, you should be able to: 
 Explain the dual nature of light 
 Calculate angles of reflection and refraction 

 
60 
 
 State real life examples of reflection and refraction 
 Draw the ray diagram for a lens and a mirror showing the object and image 
 Describe the difference between a real image and a virtual image and give an example 
of each 
 Key terms 
Ensure that you understand the key term phrases used in this unit as listed below. 
 Specular 
 Diffuse 
 Retroreflection 
 Critical angle 
 Lens 
 Mirror 
 Light ray  
 Medium 
 Index of refraction 
 Snell’s law 
 Prism 
 Virtual image 
 Real image 
 Internal reflection 
 Lens Equation

 
1 
 
 6.2 Nature of light 
There  are  two  historical  models  for  the  nature  of  light. The  speed  of  light  has  been 
measured in many ways. Reflection and refraction are the fundamental phenomena in ray 
(geometric) optics. Internal reflection is the basis for fiber optics 
Before  the  beginning  of  the  nineteenth  century,  light  was  considered  to  be  a  stream  of 
particles. The particles were either emitted by the object being viewed or emanated from 
the eyes of the viewer. 
 
Newton was the chief architect of the particle theory of light. He believed the particles left 
the object and stimulated the sense of sight upon entering the eyes. 
Christian Huygens argued that light might be some sort of a wave motion. 
Thomas Young (in 1801) provided the first clear demonstration of the wave nature of light. 
He showed that light rays interfere with each other. Such behavior could not be explained 
by particles. 
 
Christian Huygens 
He lived from 1629 to 1695. He is best known for his contributions to fields of optics and 
dynamics. He thought light was a type of vibratory motion. It spread out and produced the 
sensation of light when it hit the eye. Huygens deduced the laws of reflection and refraction. 
He explained double refraction 
 
6.2.1 Wave nature of light  
During  the  nineteenth  century,  other  developments  led  to  the  general  acceptance  of  the 
wave theory of light. Thomas Young provided evidence that light rays interfere with one 
another according to the principle of superposition. This behavior could not be explained 
by a particle theory. 
Maxwell  asserted  that  light  was  a  form  of  high-frequency  electromagnetic  wave. Hertz 
confirmed Maxwell’s predictions. 
 
6.2.2 Particle nature of light 

 
2 
 
In the pursuit to a certain the nature of light, scientists carried out several experiments and 
the wave model of light could not explain some experiments. The photoelectric effect was 
a major phenomenon not explained by waves. 
When light strikes a metal surface, electrons are sometimes ejected from the surface. 
The kinetic energy of the ejected electron is independent of the frequency of the light. 
Einstein (in 1905) proposed an explanation of the photoelectric effect that used the idea of 
quantization. The quantization model assumes that the energy of a light wave is present in 
particles called photons. 
E = hƒ 
Where h is Planck’s Constant = 6.63 x 10
-34
 J
.
s and f is frequency 
6.2.3 Dual Nature of light 
In view of these developments, we consider light as having a dual nature. Light exhibits 
the characteristics of a wave in some situations and the characteristics of a particle in other 
situations. 
Activity 1 
Explain two experiments that scientists used to establish: 
a. The wave nature of light (one experiment) 
b. The particle nature of light (one experiment) 
 
6.3 Reflection and Refraction 
6.3.1 Reflection 
A ray of light, the incident ray, travels in a medium. When it encounters a boundary with 
a  second  medium,  part  of  the  incident  ray  is  reflected  back  into the  first  medium. This 
means  it  is  directed  backward  into  the  first  medium. For  light  waves  traveling  in  three-
dimensional space, the reflected light can be in directions different from the direction of 
the incident rays. 
6.3.1.1 Specular Reflection 
Specular reflection is reflection from a smooth surface. The reflected rays are parallel to 
each other. All reflection in this unit is assumed to be specular. 

 
3 
 
 
Figure 6.1: Specular Reflection 
6.3.1.2 Diffuse Reflection 
Diffuse reflection is reflection from a rough surface. The reflected rays travel in a variety 
of directions. A surface behaves as a smooth surface as long as the surface variations are 
much smaller than the wavelength of the light. 
 
Figure 6.2: Diffuse Reflection 
6.3.1.3 Law of Reflection 
The law of reflection states that, the incident ray, the reflected ray, and the normal all lie 
in the same plane and the incident angle is the same as the reflected angle. 
The normal is a line perpendicular to the surface. It is at the point where the incident ray 
strikes the surface. The incident ray makes an angle of θ
1
 with the normal. The reflected 
ray makes an angle of θ
1
’
 
with the normal. 

 
4 
 
 
Figure 6.3: Law of Reflection 
6.3.1.4 Multiple Reflections 
To  achieve  multiple  reflections  we  need  to  have  more  a  single  mirror. The  incident  ray 
strikes the first mirror. The reflected ray is directed toward the second mirror. There is a 
second  reflection  from  the  second  mirror. This  trend  continues  up  to  the  last  mirror 
depending on the number of mirrors used. Figure 6.4 shows multiple reflections. 
 
Figure 6.4: Multiple Reflections 
6.3.1.5 Retroreflection 

 
5 
 
Assume  the  angle  between  two  mirrors  is  90
o
.
 
The  reflected  beam  returns  to  the  source 
parallel to its original path.
 
This phenomenon is called retroreflection.
 
Applications include: Measuring the distance to the Moon, Automobile taillights 
Traffic signs 
 Activity 2 
Find the values of  
θ
M
2
, 
θ
M
2
’
, γ and δ in the Figure 6.4. 
6.3.2 Refraction 
When a ray of light traveling through a transparent medium encounters a boundary leading 
into another transparent medium, part of the energy is reflected and the other part enters 
the second medium. 
The ray that enters the second medium changes its direction of propagation at the boundary. 
This bending of the ray is called refraction. 
The  incident  ray,  the  reflected  ray,  the  refracted  ray,  and  the  normal  all  lie  on  the  same 
plane. The angle of refraction depends upon the material and the angle of incidence. 
 
v
1
 is the speed of the light in the first medium and v
2
 is its speed in the second. 
The path of the light through the refracting surface is reversible. 
For example, a ray travels from A to B. 
If the ray originated at B, it would follow the line AB to reach point A. 

 
6 
 
 
Figure 6.5: Law of refraction 
Refraction V
1
 > V
2
 
Light may refract into a material where its speed is lower. The angle of refraction is less 
than the angle of incidence. The ray bends toward the normal  

 
7 
 
 
Figure 6.6: Refraction at V
1
 > V
2
 
Refraction V
2
 > V
1 
Light may refract into a material where its speed is higher. The angle of refraction is greater 
than the angle of incidence. The ray bends away from the normal. 
 
Figure 6.7: Refraction at V
2
 > V
1 
6.3.3 Light in a medium 
The light enters from the left and it may encounter an electron on the way. The electron 
may absorb the light, oscillate, and reradiate the light. The absorption and radiation cause 
the average speed of the light moving through the material to decrease. 

 
8 
 
 
Figure 6.8: Light in a medium 
6.3.4 Index of refraction 
The speed of light in any material is less than its speed in vacuum. 
The index of refraction, n, of a medium can be defined as: 
 
 
For a vacuum, n = 1 
We assume n = 1 for air also 
For other media, n > 1 
n is a dimensionless number greater than unity. 
n is not necessarily an integer. 
6.3.5 Indices of refraction 
 

 
9 
 
 
 
6.4 Snell’s law of refraction 
n
1
 sin θ
1
 = n
2
 sin θ
2
 
θ
1
 is the angle of incidence 
θ
2
 is the angle of refraction 
The experimental discovery of this relationship is usually credited to Willebrord Snell and 
is therefore known as Snell’s law of refraction. 
Refraction is a commonplace occurrence, so identify an analysis model as a wave under 
refraction. 
Activity 3. 
Light travels from air into optical fiber with an index of refraction of 1.44. 
a. In which direction does the light bend?  
b. If the angle of incidence on the end of the fiber is 22°, what is the angle of refraction inside 
the fiber? 
 6.5 Practice activity 
A light ray of wavelength 589 nm traveling through air is incident on a smooth, flat slab of 
crown glass at an angle of 30.0° to the normal. Find 
1. The angle of refraction  
2. The speed of this light once it enters the glass  
3. The wavelength of this light in the glass  

 
10 
 
6.6 Unit summary 
Unit Test 
Suggested Answers to Unit Activities 
Activity 1 
a. Superposition principle 
b. Photoelectric effect 
Activity 2 
θ
M
2
 = 55°, 
θ
M
2
 = 55°, γ = 35° and δ = 25° 
Activity 3 
a. Towards the normal 
b. 15° 
Practice Activity 
1. 19.2° 
2. 197 x 10
8
 m/s 
3. 388 nm 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
11 
 
References and Bibliography 
 
Brown,  R.G.  2013.  Introductory  physics  I:  Elementary  mechanics.  Duke  University 
Physics Department. Durham, North Carolina. 
 
Bueche, F.J. 1989. Schaum's outline of theory and problems of college physics. 8th Edition. 
McGraw-Hill. New York. 
 
Bueche, F. and E. Hecht. 2010. Schaum's outline of theory and problems of college physics. 
McGraw-Hill.  
 
Constant  F.W.  1967. Fundamental  principles  of  physics.  Adson- Wesley  Publishing 
Company Incorporated. 
 
Giacoli D.C. 1980. Physics. Prentice-Hall Inc. Englewood Cliffs. New Jersey. 
 
Marion   J.B.   1979. General   Physics   with   Bioscience   Essays.   John   Wiley   and   Sons 
(International Edition). New York. 
 
McDonough J.M.  2009. Lectures  in  elementary  fluid dynamics:  Physics, Mathematics  and 
Applications. Department of Mechanical Engineering and Mathematics, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky. 
 
Muncester R. 1990. A level physics. 3rd Edition. ELBS. 
 
Nelkon, M. and P. Parker. 1987. Advanced Level Physics, 6th Edition. Heinmann. London. 
 
Nelkon, M. and P. Parker. 1995. Advanced Level Physics, Pearson Education. 
 
Titcomb G.R.A. and M. Jackson (1970). Fundamentals of engineering science.  Hutchinson. 
 

 
12 
 
Titherington  D. and J.G. Rimmer. 1970. Applied mechanics. McGraw-Hill. London. 
 
Todd, K.D. and L.W. Mays. 2005. Groundwater Hydrology. 3rd ed. Hoboken, N,J,: John 
Wiley and Sons. 
 