

SOIL FERTILITY

SOIL FERTILITY
•Soilfertilityisthestatusofthesoilwithrespecttoitsabilityto
supplyelementsessentialforplantgrowthwithoutatoxic
concentrationofanyelement.
•Thussoilfertilityfocusesonadequateandbalancedsupplyof
elementsornutrientstosatisfytheneedsoftheplants.
•Plantshavedifferentneedsfortheessentialnutrientsand
differencesintolerancestothetoxicelements.

SOIL PRODUCTIVITY
▪Soilproductivityencompassessoilfertilityplusallotherfactors
affectingplantgrowth,includingsoilmanagement.
▪Soilproductivityisthemeasureofsoilsabilitytoproducea
particularcroporsequenceofcropsunderaspecifiedmanagement
system.
▪Allproductivesoilsarefertileforthecropsbeinggrownbutmany
soilsareunproductivebecausetheyaresubjectedtodroughtor
unsatisfactorygrowthfactorsormanagementpractices.

SOIL FERTILITY IMPROVEMENT
INORGANIC FERTILISERS
Afertilizerisanymaterialofnaturalorsyntheticorigin(otherthanlimingmaterials)thatis
appliedtosoilsortoplanttissuestosupplyoneormoreplantnutrientsessentialtothe
growthofplants.
Whyapplyfertilizers?
Thegeneralobjectiveistosupplyplantnutrientstoproducehighyieldsandofhighquality.
Specificallyfertilizersareappliedto;
•Toincreaseyieldintheyearofapplicationoffertilizers.
•Fertilizersactasaremedyofanutrientdeficiencyinthesoil(Leachinganddrainage).
•Replacementofnutrientstakenupbythecropisdonebyapplicationoffertilizers.
•Tobuilduphigherfertilitystatusthanbeforeincaseoffixationforphosphorous,potassium.

Loss and source of nutrients in the soil
Loss of Nutrients in the soil
•Leaching
•Chemicallybound
•Plantremoval
•Usedbymicroorganisms
•Erosion
•ExcessiveIrrigation
•Drainage
•Continuouscultivation
Sources of soil nutrients
•Atmosphere: Nitrogen and sulphur
•Decomposition of organic matter
•Mineral and organic fertilizers
•Weathering of rocks and minerals
•Nitrification (N fixing bacteria)

GROUPS OF NUTRIENTS
Generallyplantsrequireaminimumofsixteen(16)nutrientstocompletegrowth.Theyare
termedasessentialelements.
Thenutrientsrequiredforhealthyplantlifeareclassifiedaccordingtotheelements,butthe
elementsarenotusedasfertilizers.
Plant nutrition
Macronutrients:nitrogen(N),phosphorus(P),potassium(K),calcium(Ca),sulfur(S),
magnesium(Mg),carbon(C),oxygen(O),hydrogen(H)
Micronutrients:(ortraceminerals):iron(Fe),boron(B),chlorine(Cl),manganese(Mn),zinc
(Zn),copper(Cu),molybdenum(Mo)

ElementChemical symbolPrincipal form (s) taken up by the roots 
Macronutrients
CarbonCCO
2
HydrogenHH
2
O
OxygenOH
2
O, O
2
NitrogenNNH
4
+
, NO
3
-
PhosphorousPH
2
PO
4
-
, HPO
4
2-
PotassiumKK
+
CalciumCaCa
2
+
MagnesiumMgMg
2
+
SulfurS
Micronutrients
IronFeFe
2
+
, Fe
3
+
ZincZnZn
2
+
Zn(OH)
2
ManganeseMnMn
2
+
CopperCuCu
2
+
BoronBB(OH)
2
MolybdenumMoMoO
4
2-
SiliconSiSi(OH)
4
0
SodiumNaNa
+
ChlorideClCl
-
CobaltCoCo
2
+
VanadiumVV
+

Groups of Nutrients
Group 1: CO
2
(air) and H
2
0 (Water)
C, H, O
Group 2: Primary macronutrients
N ( For leaf growth), 
P ( Development of roots, flowers, seeds and fruits), 
K (Strong stem growth, movement of water in plants)
Group 3: Secondary macronutrients
S, Mg, Ca
Group 4: Micronutrients
Cu, Zn, Mo, Mn, Cl-, B, Fe.

Determination Of Which Nutrients to apply 
Thetypeofnutrientstoapplyisdeterminedby:
•Haphazardchoice:Thisisthecasewhensomeonehasnoknowledgeandno
resourcesbutprobablythefertilizershavejustbeengiventothem.
•Resultsofexperiments:Experimentsarecarriedoutovertimeandoverdifferent
locationstodeterminetheappropriatedeficientnutrientsandmake
recommendations.
•Previousexperiences:Thismaynotbethereliablewaybecauseseasonchanges.
•Soilanalysis:Thisisreliablebecauseitgivesaroughguideofthenatureofsoilsto
determinetherighttypeoffertilizer.

Types Of inorganic Fertilizers
Fertilizersmaycontainoneormoreoftheessentialelements.
Nitrogen,PhosphateandPotassiumarethemainplantnutrientsand
thesethreeprovidethebasisforthemajorgroupsoffertilizers.
Single/Simple/Straightfertilizers:-Thosethatcontainoneofthe
essentialelements.
Mixed/Compound:-Thosefertilizersthatcontaintwoormoreofthe
majorelements.

Single,simpleorstraightfertilizers
Nitrogenousfertilizers:
Allcommercialnitrogenousfertilizersareproducedfromammonia.Themajornitrogenous
fertilizersare:
Sulphateofammonia(NH
4
)
2
SO
4
Contains21%Nitrogen
Characteristics
•Finecrystallinesalt,whichisgenerallywhite.
•Solubleinwaterandactsquicklyinthesoil
•Itreplacescalciumionsonthehumusandclaycomplexsothatcalciumsulphate
andcalciumnitrateareformedinthesoil
•Thesecalciumsaltsareeasilyleachedoutofthesoil,whichtendstobecomeacid
asaresult.
Thesoilacidifyingpropertyisthemajordisadvantageofammoniasulphatefertilizer.

CalciumAmmoniumNitrateCANorNitrochalk
•Itcontains25-26%Nitrogen.
•Itisamixtureofammoniumnitrate(NH
4
NO
3
)andfinelyprecipitatedcarbonateoflime
CaCO
3
.
•Halfisammoniaformandtheotherhalfisinnitrateform,whichbecomesavailableto
plantssoonafterapplicationandtherestbecomesavailablelater.
•Usuallyapplicationisdoneatplantingtimeastopdressing.
Advantages
Acidifyingpowerislessthanthatof(NH
4
)SO
4
becauseofthecalciumcarbonatecontentof
40%
Disadvantages
•Itformshardlumpssoitisdifficulttodistributeinthefield.
•Itrequirescarefulstorageandhandling

Urea
Ureaisacrystallinewhitecolourfertilizerthathas45-46%Nitrogen.
Verysolubleinwaterandhighlydeliquescent(potentialtobecomeliquidinair).
UreahashighpercentageofNitrogencontentanditreadilyundergoeshydrolysisinthesoil
toformammoniumcarbonate.Thisisthenconvertedtonitratebynitrifyingbacteria.
Ittendstoattractmoisturebecauseitismorehygroscopic.
Urea can be used directly on a foliar spray it can be used on wheat, rice, potato, and fruit 
crops.

AmmoniumNitrate
•Aconcentratedquickactingnitrogenousfertilizer
(33%N).
•Thistypeoffertilizerisnotusedinthetropicsbecause
itposesasasafetyhazard.
•InsolutionformNH
4
+
andNO
3
-
ionsareavailableto
plants.
•TopreventNO
3
-
fromexplodingunderpressureorheat
granulesareoftencoatedwithkaolin,whichisaninert
powderthatalsopreventsthefertilizerfromcakingup
inthebag.
Ammonium nitrate 
fertiliseris a hazard due to 
its detonation potential and 
ability to act as an oxidising 
agent fuelling a fire.

Average composition of some common nitrogen fertilizers:
Fertilizer     Formula    Source 
 
Sulphate of Ammonia   (NH
4
)
2
SO
4
   21 
Nitrate of soda    Na(NO
3
)
2
    16 
Ammonium nitrate    NH
4
NO
3
    33 
Urea     CO(NH
2
)
2
    46 
CAN     Ca(NH
4
NO
3
)
2 
  26 
 
 

Phosphatic Fertilisers
Phosphatic fertilizers are second in importance to nitrogen fertilizers. 
Phosphorous exist as phosphorous pentoxide. The three grades of phosphate solubility:
1.Water soluble phosphates
2.Citrate soluble phosphates (Ammonium citrate solution)
3.Phosphates that are only soluble in strong mineral acids such as sulphuric, nitric or 
hydrochloric acid.
Solubility depends on 
•Chemical composition of the phosphate
•The particle size itself; the finer the particle size the easier the solubility
•The water-soluble form is the most valuable for agricultural purposes. For example 
monocalcium phosphate Ca(H
2
PO
4
)
2
.
Examples:
Single super phosphate
•Greyish- white granular fertilizer
•It has an acid odour

Potash Fertilizers
Most potash fertilizers are materials refined from natural deposits of potassium salt.
Potassium oxide (K2O) is readily available to plants since K does not exist in nature but only 
as K2O. Common potassium based fertilizers are:
Muriate of Potash or Potassium chloride 
•Course or fine salt.
•It contains 60-63% K
2
O (50-52%K)
•It is very soluble and quick acting it is best applied to the soil at the time of planting.
Sulphate of potash
•Carries 25% of potash and 25% of magnesium sulphate. Mainly used in tobacco 
production.

Mixed compounds
These are fertilizers that supply two or more of the major plant nutrients (NPK). 
 

Average composition of some common compound fertilizers
Name   Chemical  Nutrient content
   Composition  N P K S
Di-ammonium Phosphate (NH
4
)
2
HPO
4                       
18 46 -  -
Potassium Nitrate  KNO
3
    13 - 37-44 0-2
23.21.0 + 4S     23 21 - 4
20.20.0      20 20 - -
Compound A     2 18 15 -
Compound B     4 18 15 -
Compound C     6 18 15 -
Compound D     8 18 15 -
Compound L     18 15 10 -
Compound S     6 18 6 -
Super B Mixture     5.33 24 20 -
Super C Mixture     8 24 20 -
Super D Mixture     10.7 24 20 -

FACTORS AFFECTING FERTILIZER USE
Crop Factors
Fertilizer application is productive when crops respond to it.
Some crops need big doses while others don’t i.e. legumes require more of phosphorous while cereals 
require more of nitrogen.
Crop variety- the more recently developed a crop the more responsive it is to higher doses of fertilizer.
Soil factors
Ability of the soil to supply nutrients
Physical properties of the soil i.e. depth, texture and structure.
Climatic factors
In little rainfall areas leaching is less and therefore soils are more fertile. Little rainfall, less fertilizer 
application.
Economic factors
If fertilizers prices are low then a lot of it is used. High crop price will mean a larger fertilizer 
application demanded to give a big chance to the crop.

Management factors
•Increased crop outputs usually require increased fertilizer inputs.
•Adding more and more fertilizer will bring little or no increase in production 
when other factors of production are limiting.

FERTILIZER APPLICATION
Broadcasting
It refers to spreading fertilizers uniformly all over the field.
Suitable for crops with dense stand, the plant roots permeate the whole volume of the soil, 
large doses of fertilizers are applied and insoluble phosphatic fertilizers such as rock 
phosphate are used.
Broadcasting of fertilizers is of two types.
i) Broadcasting at sowing or planting (Basal application)
The main objectives of broadcasting the fertilizers at sowing time are to uniformly distribute 
the fertilizer over the entire field and to mix it with soil.
ii) Top dressing
It is the broadcasting of fertilizers particularly nitrogenous fertilizers in closely sown crops like 
paddy and wheat, with the objective of supplying nitrogen in readily available form to 
growing plants.

Placement
It refers to the placement of fertilizers in soil at a specific 
place with or without reference to the position of the seed. 
The most common methods of placement are as follows:
i) Plough sole placement
•Fertilizer is placed at the bottom of the plough furrow in a 
continuous band during the process of ploughing.
•Every band is covered as the next furrow is turned.
•This is suitable for areas where soil becomes quite dry up 
to few cm below the soil surface and have heavy clay pan.

ii) Deep placement
It is the placement of ammonium nitrogenous fertilizers in 
the reduction zone of soil particularly in paddy fields, 
where the nitrogen remains available to the crop. 
This method ensures better distribution of fertilizer in the 
root zone soil and prevents loss of nutrients by run-off.
iii) Localized placement
It refers to the application of fertilizers into the soil close 
to the seed or plant in order to supply the nutrients in 
adequate amounts to the roots of growing plants. 
The common methods to place fertilizers close to the 
seed.

Drilling
In this method, the fertilizer is applied at the time of sowing by 
means of a seed-cum-fertilizer drill. 
This places fertilizer and the seed in the same row but at 
different depths. 
Although this method has been found suitable for the 
application of phosphatic and potash fertilizers in cereal crops, 
but sometimes germination of seeds and young plants may get 
damaged due to higher concentration of soluble salts.

Side dressing
It refers to the spread of fertilizer in between the rows 
and around the plants. 
The common methods of side-dressing are;
•Placement of nitrogenous fertilizers by hand in 
between the rows of crops like maize, sugarcane, 
cotton etc.
•Placement of fertilizers around the trees like 
mango, apple, grapes, papaya etc.

Band placement
If refers to the placement of fertilizer in bands.
Band placement is of two types.
i) Hill placement
It is practiced for the application of fertilizers in orchards. In this 
method, fertilizers are placed close to the plant in bands on one 
or both sides of the plant. The length and depth of the band 
varies with the nature of the crop.
ii) Row placement
When the crops like sugarcane, potato, maize, cereals etc., are 
sown close together in rows, the fertilizer is applied in 
continuous bands on one or both sides of the row, which is 
known as row placement.

Pellet application
It refers to the placement of nitrogenous fertilizer in the form of pellets 2.5 to 5 cm deep 
between the rows of the paddy crop.
The fertilizer is mixed with the soil in the ratio of 1:10 and made small pellets of convenient 
size to deposit in the mud of paddy fields.
Foliar application
•It refers to the spraying of fertilizer solutions containing one or more nutrients on the 
foliage of growing plants.
•Several nutrient elements are readily absorbed by leaves when they are dissolved in water 
and sprayed on them.
•The concentration of the spray solution has to be controlled, otherwise serious damage 
may result due to scorching of the leaves.
•Foliar application is effective for the application of minor nutrients like iron, copper, boron, 
zinc and manganese. Sometimes insecticides are also applied along with fertilizers.

FERTILIZER AMOUNTS DETERMINATION
Amount of fertilizer per unit area:
Assume you have been given a Sasakawa maize plot consisting of 80 ridges each 100m long spaced at 0.75m and 
0.25m planting station spacing. (400kg of 23:21:0+4S is required per hectare). Calculate amount of fertilizer 
required per planting station
Calculate the area of the plot 
80 x 0.75 x 100 = 6000m
2
Amount of fertilizer required per plot
1ha=10000m
2
400kg=10000m
2
? Kg = 6000m
2 
6000m
2
*400 kg/10000m
2
=240kg/plot
 

Amount of fertilizer required per ridge
= 80 ridges = 240kg
1 ridge= 240kg/80 = 3kgs/ ridge
Amount of fertilizer per planting station in grams
100m/0.25m = 400planting stations
3kg/400planting stations = 0.0075kg/planting station
1kg=1000g
0.0075Kg= 0.0075kg/1000g/kg 
= 7.5g/planting station

Amount of fertilizer per unit area:
Assume you have been given a maize plot consisting of 120 ridges each 140m long spaced at 
0.80m and 0.20m planting station spacing. (340kg of 23:21:0+4S is required per hectare)
Calculate 
1.Fertilizer required per plot
2.Fertilizer required per ridge
3.Fertilizer required per planting station

Amount of fertilizer per unit area:
Assume you have been given a maize plot consisting of 210 ridges each 160m long spaced at 
0.50m and 0.15m planting station spacing. (500kg of 23:21:0+4S is required per hectare)
Calculate 
1.Fertilizer required per plot
2.Fertilizer required per ridge
3.Fertilizer required per planting station



ORGANIC FERTILIZER
Organic fertilizersarefertilizersderived fromanimal matter, 
human and animal excreta andvegetable matter(e.g.crop 
residues)
The main organic fertilizers are:
•Farm Yard Manure
•Green Manure
•Compost
Organic farming has become a part of the global agricultural 
industry and therefore organic products are traded not just 
between farms and regions but between countries and 
continents

Farm yard manure
•These include animal dung, urine and animal by products 
such as bone meal and dried blood. 
•Advantage of animal manure is that it is very cheap and adds 
organic matter to the soil
•Bulk of the manure comes from cattle. Most concentrated 
comes from poultry.
Variations in chemical composition of farm yard manure is 
due to:
➢Type of animal.
➢Condition of the animal.
➢The food consumed
➢The litter used and the way the manure is treated.

Advantages and              Disadvantages of FYM
•Increases soil fertility
•A natural source of available 
nitrogen
•Slow releasing of nutrients to 
the soil
•Helps water and nutrient 
retention
•Improves soil structure
•Attracts worms to the soil
•Ideal for mulching
•Needed in high quantities 
•Uncertain nutrient composition
•Can contain herbicide residues
•Anaerobic decomposition cause 
bad smell 

Green Manures
Green manure crops are usually fast growing annual 
legumes/ cereals or grasses. 
They are usually incorporated in the soil when they are 
green and succulent.

Advantages and                 Disadvantages of GM
•Increases organic matter content
•Improves the soil structure
•Checks erosion and leaching
•Helps to control weeds by acting as a 
smother crop
•Moisture use - where moisture is limiting, 
green manure crops canutilize moisture.
•Establishment costs
•Rotation limitations.

Compost manure
Compost is decomposed organic matter, such as 
crop residues and/or animal manure.
Compost is decomposed organic matter while 
animal manure usually unprocessed. 

Advantages of Compost
•Preparing your own fertilizer is much cheaper than having to buy chemical fertilizer.
•Organic refuse, containing nutrients is being put to use again otherwise it would be left to 
decay and the nutrients lost. 
•It is a good method for managing waste
•An application of organic fertilizer improves soil structure.
•Soil fertility is improved in the long term: nutrients from the organic matter are released 
gradually over a long period of time.
•The capacity of the soil to retain water is improved because of the increase in organic 
matter.
•Organic fertilizers contain many trace elements not normally found in fertilizers.
•Composted material is less bulky than original material
•Easier and more pleasant to handle
•Many weed seeds and disease-causing organisms may be killed by the high temperatures.

Disadvantages of compost
•Preparing compost is labor intensive and time consuming
•Making your own organic matter is not possible everywhere. It depends on space, available 
material, local conditions and other factors.
•A compost heap attracts insects, rats, mice and also snakes.
•Concentration of nutrients in organic fertilizers is considerably lower as compared to chemical 
fertilizers.
NOTE
➢Chemical fertilizers are often used up by the end of the season whereas OM continues to enhance 
soil fertility, soil structure and water storage capacity.
➢The presence of OM ensures that the chemical fertilizer is more efficiently utilized by the crop.
➢Organic matter retains plant nutrients and thus prevents the fertilizer from being washed away.
➢It is a waste of money to apply chemical fertilizers in a soil that is poor in organic matter, if it is not 
done with measures to increase the level of organic matter in the soil.

Process Of Making Compost 
(Practical)

Process Of Making Compost (njira ya changu)
Site Selection
•The site should be convenient for the collection of materials or water supply
•The site should be near to the garden if possible
•It is ideal if the site is under the shelter.
•It should be away from the living houses especially the kitchen.
Materials Preparation
•Any kind of materials can be used to make compost. 
•The rough materials e.g maize or sorghum stalks need to be broken or chopped before use. 
•The ideal length is 10-20 cm.

Water Requirements
•Water requirements differ depending on materials, weather and other factors. 
•If dry, grasses or leaves are used in compost heap the supplementary water must be applied 
during the process of turning. 
•Green garden refuse or lawn clippings can be used to make compost even without any 
additional water.
•Mulching the compost heap during the dry season is important. 
•In rainy season, how to prevent the excess rainy water is a problem. 
•Compost shed is a necessary facility for a permanent compost site. Making compost indoor 
is the ideal way for the success.

Size Of The Compost Heap
•One or two cubic meters of volume of compost heap is recommended. 
•Much smaller size has large area/volume ratio, such that heat is lost so easily and that 
hinders the microbes to do their work faster. 
•Much bigger size has poor ventilation; the process of decomposition becomes slow when 
oxygen inside has been exhausted. 
•The general size of a compost heap is 1.5 - 2.0m diameter of the base and 1.5-1.8m high. 
•The size may be smaller in hot season and bigger in cool season.
Shape Of The Compost Heap
•Conic heap is recommended shape. 
•The slopes of cone are beneficial for draining rainwater and keeping the heap from 
sogginess. 
•The conic shape also has good ratio of volume and area that makes good ventilation and 
heat conservation.

Building The Compost Heap
•Materials: Dry grass, manures (Chicken litter, cow/ox dung), sticks
•Tools: Garden fork, hayfork, shovel, watering can.
•Site selection: 4m
2 
for each heap.
Heaping
•Mark a circle on the ground with 1.5m diameters for the base of the heap.
•Put the grasses in the marked circle with the thickness of 20cm as the base.
•Scatter the chicken litter evenly on the grasses about 3cm thick or 3 shovels, ox dung about 
5 shovels.
•Water the base and make sure that every part has been watered adequately.
•Put the grasses on top of the base 20cm thickness as before.
•In order to make the materials evenly spread in the heap, each layer has to be flat.
•Scatter the litter again.
•Water the second layer again, does not allow the excess water to run off from the side.
•Repeat the heaping of the alternate layers (grasses and manure) up to 1.5m high with a 
conic freestanding shape.

Turning And Mixing
•In order to aerate and reduce the overheat; compost heap is turned after 5 days. 
•After five to six times of turning, the compost is ready for use. 
•The materials are mixed and fluffed during the turning.
In order to have all materials in middle layer to speed up decomposition, the following 
examples of turning are recommended after you consider the heap to be in three layers:
•Scrap the outer layer to be the inner layer of the new heap.
•Keep the middle layer aside
•Put the inner layer to be the middle layer of the new heap
•Put the middle layer to be the outer layer of the new heap.

Indications Of A Mature Compost
•The color of the material is dark brown or black
•None of the original components are recognized
•The heap has a granular texture in every part
•The material becomes soft and crumby
•The heap shrinks to less half the original volume.

Preserving Compost
•It is better to preserve compost when it is mature
•Losses of nutrients will occur due to rain or strong sunlight
•Spread compost until somewhat dry (25-35%) moisture, then keep it indoor, or fill it in bags and 
store them under the shelter.
Using Compost
Mulch the land with compost before ploughing and mixing with the soil. The soil condition will be 
improved year after year after use of compost to the whole land.
Supply the compost to the planting holes if the compost is limited. The following method is 
recommended for planting trees:
Mix the compost with soil hall full of the holes. One handful fertilizer mixing is recommended.
Put a layer of soil in the holes above the compost soil mixture
Plant the seedlings and have the planting stations a little bit higher than the ground level, it will sink 
after watering in later days.
Rate of compost application vary from soil to soil. Generally soils may have good yields with the rate of 
2-3kg per square meter. Sandy or clay soils may need more than 6kg per square meter. 