

Agriculture and the 
Environment
Genetically modified organisms(GMOs)

What are GMOs?
Genetic modification is a special set of 
technologies that alter the genetic makeup of 
living organisms such as animals, plants, or 
bacteria. 
A genetically modified organism (GMO)by 
definition, is an organism whose genetic 
structure has been altered by incorporating a 
gene that will express a desirable trait, often 
termed gene splicing. 
Most often the transferred gene allows the 
organism to express a trait that will add to its 
desirability to producers or consumers of the end 
product. 
Cabbage modified with genes 
from the tail of a scorpion for 
pest control

Modification of DNA
•DNAistheblueprintfortheindividuality
ofanorganism(Itstoresinformation
abouttheindividualityofanorganism)
•ThesegmentsofDNAwhichhavebeen
associatedwithspecificfeaturesor
functionsofanorganismarecalledgenes.
•Molecularbiologistsuseenzymesto
changethestructureofDNAinliving
organisms.Someoftheseenzymescan
cutandjoinstrandsofDNA.Usingsuch
enzymes,scientistcutspecificgenesfrom
DNAandbuildcustomizedDNAusing
thesegenes

Reasons for Genetic Modification
•To produce pest resistant varieties e.g. soybeans, 
corn, cotton, and canola. 
•To produce pathogen resistant varieties e.g. virus 
resistant crops.
•To produce varieties with controlled nutritive value 
e.g. rice with increased iron and vitamins that may 
alleviate chronic malnutrition. 
•To produce varieties that would be able to survive 
weather extremes, e.g. drought resistant crops. 
•To produce plants that produce vaccines e.g. 
bananas that produce human vaccines against 
infectious diseases such as hepatitis B.
•To produce organisms that mature more quickly 
and yield years earlier. 

Enhanced taste and quality.
Reduced maturation time.
Increased nutrients, yields, and stress tolerance. 
Improved resistance to diseases and pests. 
Crops may be produced that lack known allergens
Increased resistance, productivity and feed efficiency.
Better yields of meat, eggs, and milk.
Improved animal health. 
Longer shelf life for both plant and animal products
"Friendly" bioherbicidesand bioinsecticides.
Conservation of soil, water, and energy.
Better natural waste management(reduce unnecessary food wastage).
Pro’s and Cons of Genetic modification

Safety:
Potential human health impact: allergens and transfer of antibiotic resistance markers.
Potential environmental impact: unintended transfer of transgenes through cross-
pollination, unknown effects on other organisms (e.g., soil microbes), and loss of flora and 
fauna biodiversity. 
Other potential effects:
Carcinogenic effects-This is a situation which alters the normal growth of cells, which leads 
to cancer.
Terratogeniceffects-These are birth defects if reproductive cells are affected, and their 
effects show up in the offspring e.g. mental retardation and enzyme deficiencies. Chiras
(1998) reports that 7% of all newborns in USA have birth defects.
Mutagenic effects-This is the change in the genetic make up of an organism. Some 
mutations are lethal (especially of recessive genes), and nature acts against harmful 
mutations..
Controversies of Genetic modification

Labelling:
GMO labels are often missing or misleading
Countries have varying regulations regarding GMO labelling: it is not mandatory to label GM 
foods in other countries
Access and Intellectual Property:
Domination of world food production by a few companies.
Increasing dependence on industrialized nations by developing countries.
Ethics:
Violation of natural organisms' intrinsic values.
Tampering with nature by mixing genes among species.
Objections to consuming animal genes in plants and vice versa.
Controversies of Genetic modification