

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 1
COURSE CODE:  VPC 302 
COURSE TITLE:  Introductory Veterinary Pharmacology 
NUMBER OF UNITS: 3 UNITS 
COURSE DURATION: TWO HOURS PER WEEK 
 
 
COURSE DETAILS: 
Course Coordinator:  Dr. Olubukola Tolulope Adenubi D.V.M., M.Sc. 
Email:   bukioguns@yahoo com 
Office Location:  Dept. of Veterinary Physiology and Pharmacology, 
COLVET 
Other Lecturers:    Prof. R.O.A. Arowolo, Dr. J.O. Olukunle,  
Dr. K.T. Biobaku    
 
 
 
 
Introduction  to the  evolution  and  principles  of veterinary  pharmacology  and  toxicology, 
sources, nomenclature   and   presentation   of   drugs,   routes   of   drug   administration, 
pharmacokinetics   and   pharmacodynamics; adverse   drug   reactions   and   interactions, 
introduction to neuropharmacology, introductory toxicology. 
 
 
 
This is a compulsory course for all veterinary medical students in the University. In view 
of this, students are expected to participate in all the course activities and have minimum 
of 75% attendance to be able to write the final examination. 
 
 
Aliu, Y.O (2007). Veterinary Pharmacology (1st edition).  
Boothes M. (2001).  Veterinary Pharmacology and Therapeutics  for small animals. 
Nicholas  H.B. (1988). Veterinary  Pharmacology  and  Therapeutics.  IOWA  University 
Press. 
Wanamaker B.P and Kathy L.M (2009). Applied Pharmacology for Veterinary  
Technicians  333 -335. 
COURSE DETAILS: 
COURSE CONTENT: 
COURSE REQUIREMENTS: 
READING LIST: 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 2
E 
 
HISTORICAL DEVELOPMENT OF PHARMACOLOGY 
 Ever since it was realized that a large number of diseases that afflict animals and 
man  were  caused  by  bacteria,  scientists  have  been  looking  for  substances  that 
would kill the bacteria but leave the infected subject unharmed. 
 The  evolution  of pharmacology can  be  traced  through  3  distinct  periods;  a  pre-
Ehrlich  era  before  1891;  the  period  of  Paul  Ehrlich  (1854-1915),  and  the  period 
after 1935 highlighted by the discovery of sulphonamides and antibiotics. 
 Pre-Ehrlich   era: The   Chinese   were   aware,   over   3,500   years   ago,  of   the 
therapeutic  properties  of  moldy  curd  of  soybean.  They  applied  this  material  as 
standard treatment for carbuncles, boils and similar infections.  
 The powdered bark of cinchona has been used since 1630 to treat malaria.  
 In 1877, Louis Pasteur and Joubert first described the concept of antibiosis. They 
noted that the anthrax  bacilli grew rapidly when  inoculated  into sterile urine, but 
failed  to  multiply  and  soon  died  if  one  of  the  ‘common’  bacteria  of  the  air  was 
introduced into the urine culture at the same time.  
 Ehrlich era: Towards the end of the 19
th
 century, a German  bacteriologist, Paul 
Ehrlich   (1854-1915),   observed   that   certain vital   dyes   like   methylene   blue 
specifically  killed  and  stained  certain  bacterial  cells.  He  reasoned  that  chemical 
substances might be produced that could unite with and destroy parasitic agents of 
diseases without injuring the host cells. He aptly called these chemical substances 
‘magic  bullets’.  In  1891,  he  demonstrated  the  efficacy  of  methylene  blue  in  the 
treatment of human malaria.  
 The  first  real  step  forward  was  the  preparation  of  arsphenamine,  an  organic 
arsenical  by  Ehrlich  and  co-workers  in  1900.  This  substance  was  of  value  in 
treating syphilis and trypanosomosis. Ehrlich  is regarded as the  father of  modern 
antimicrobial  chemotherapy;  he  was  awarded  a  Noble  prize  in  1908  with  a 
Russian bacteriologist, Elli Metchnikoff.  
 Little progress was made in the next thirty years. But there were many antiseptics 
and   disinfectants   introduced   that   could   eradicate   infections   when   applied 
LECTURE NOTES 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 3
topically;  their  systemic  use  was  precluded  by  their  toxic  reactions  or  tissue 
injury. 
 Post  Ehrlich  era: In  1929,  Alexander  Fleming  of  St  Mary’s  Hospital,  London, 
whilst  studying  variants  of Staphylococcus found  one  of  his  culture  plates 
contaminated  with  a  fungus  (later  identified  as Penicillum  notatum);  the  fungus 
destroyed  surrounding  bacterial  colonies.  His  efforts  to  extract  the  bacteriolytic 
substances failed.  
 In 1935, Gerhard Domaqk reported that the red azo dye, prontosil protected mice 
against  infection  by  certain  bacteria.  Bovet,  Nitti  and  Trefoues  proved  that 
prontosil   owed   its   therapeutic   efficacy   to   its   conversion   in   the   body   to 
sulphanilamide. This was a milestone in the history of pharmacology. 
 In  1940,  Chain,  Falk  and  Florey  of  Oxford  succeeded  in  producing  significant 
quantities of the first penicillins from culture of Penicillin notatum. 
  In  1944,  after  more  than  10,000  microorganisms  had  been  screened,  Waksman 
and  his  colleagues  reported  the  isolation  of  streptomycin  from Streptomycin 
griseus, found in a diagnostic culture from a chicken’s throat. Waksman also first 
defined the term ‘antibiotic’ as a chemical substance produced by microorganisms 
(bacteria,  fungi,  and  actinomycetes)  having  the  property  of  destroying  other 
micro-organisms or inhibiting their growth in high dilution. 
 
NOMENCLATURE AND PRESENTATION OF DRUGS, 
All drugs have at least three names: 
a. Chemical name 
b. Non- proprietary/ Generic name 
c. Proprietary/ Trade/ Brand name 
Drugs are presented as solid, semi-solid, liquid, aerosol or gaseous forms. 
Immediate Release Drug Formulations 
Solid Dosage Forms: 
Tablets 
 A mixture of active drug and inert binding materials or excipients, usually in 
powder form, pressed or compacted into a solid. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 4
 Some tablets are in the shape of capsules, and are called “caplets”  
Wettable Powder 
 Drug dosage form in fine particles. 
 Could be sprinkled on feed or dissolved in drinking water. 
 It is commonly used in poultry. 
Suppository 
 Inserted as a solid into the rectum (rectal suppository), vagina (vaginal 
suppository) or urethra (urethral suppository), where it dissolves inside the body 
to deliver the drug. 
 Used to deliver both systemically-acting and locally-acting medications. 
Capsule 
 Hard gelatin e.g ampicillin capsule for dry, powdered ingredients or miniature 
pellets. 
 Soft gelatin e.g garlic capsule. 
 Primarily used for oils and for active ingredients that are dissolved or suspended 
in oil. 
 
Semi solid Dosage Forms: 
 Examples are ointments, creams and gels commonly used to treat dermatological 
diseases. 
 Ointments are homogeneous, viscous, semi-solid, greasy, thick oil, intended for 
external application to the skin or mucous membranes. 
Liquid Dosage Forms:  
Suspension 
 Formulation of two-phase system composed of a finely divided solid that is 
dispersed in a liquid phase, which is usually water. 
 Suspensions are common as oral drug preparations.  
 Never administer intravenously. 
Emulsion 
 Aqueous suspension of insoluble liquid substance usually with emulsifying 
agent to stabilize the preparation. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 5
 Usually administered orally or topically. 
Solutions 
 Oral Solution: Aqueous preparation of drug for oral use. The drug is in true 
solution. 
 Parenteral Solution: Sterile and pyrogen free aqueous preparation for injection. 
Drugs may also be dissolved in oil for prolonged absorption. 
 Ophthalmic Solution: Sterile hypotonic aqueous solution of drug for 
administration into the eye. 
Tinctures 
 Tinctures vary in strength. Examples are tincture of iodine, opium, belladonna 
and digitalis. 
Liniment 
 Liquid preparation of a drug in which the drug is dissolved or suspended in 
dilute alcohol or water. They often contain dissolved or  emulsified oils and 
are applied to the skin by rubbing or massage. 
Lotion 
 Usually an oil in water base which contains insoluble medicinal agents in 
suspension and is applied to the skin without rubbing following which the 
solvent evaporates leaving a film of drug. 
Aerosol 
 The drug exists as liquid or solid particles so small as to remain suspended in air 
for long periods. 
 Aerosol generators may produce particles in 1-5μm ranges. 
 For therapeutic purpose, aerosols are introduced in the body by inhalation. 
 
Controlled-Release Drug Delivery Systems 
Synonyms: Sustained; Modified; Prolonged; Slow; Gradual and Extended Forms 
 Provide an initial therapeutic dose immediately following administration and 
subsequently followed by a gradual release of the drug over a prolonged period 
of time. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 6
 Extend the duration of pharmacological response compared to the conventional 
single dose formulation. 
 They produce therapeutic blood level quickly and maintain such levels without 
the usual “peak –and-valley” effect of a normal dosage form. 
 Examples: enteric coated tablets, sub dermal implants, depot antibiotics etc. 
  
ROUTES OF DRUG ADMINISTRATION 
Enteral: Oral and rectal 
Parenteral: intramuscular, intravenous, subcutaneous, intrammamary, intrathecal etc 
PHARMACOKINETICS 
DRUG ABSORPTION  
The passage of drug from its site of non-intravascular administration into the blood.  
The factors that may affect the absorption process include the following:  
 Mechanism of absorption  
 pH and ionization status of the drug  
 Absorptive surface area  
 Blood supply to the area  
 Solubility of the drug  
 Dosage form  
 Status of the GI tract  
 Interaction with other medications.  
1. Mechanism of absorption:- 
 Drugs pass across cellular membranes through three common methods.  
a) Passive transport 
b) The drug may pass through pores  

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 7
c)   Active transport  
2. pH and ionization status of the drug: 
 Many drugs can pass through a cell membrane only if they are non-ionized (not 
positively or negatively charged). 
 Most drugs exist either as ionized or non-ionized 
 The pH of the drug and the pH of the area in which the drug is located can 
determine the degree to which a drug becomes ionized and thus is absorbed. 
3. Absorptive surface of the area: 
As the absorptive surface of the area of drug placement increases, so does the rate of 
absorption. One of the largest absorptive surfaces in the body is found in the small 
intestine, because of the efficient design of the villi that maximizes the surface area. 
4. Blood supply to the area: 
  The rate of absorption of the drug is dependent on the perfusion rate to that area. 
Therefore, if the perfusion rate is high it means the rate of absorption of the drug is low. 
Drugs are absorbed faster in the muscles than subcutaneously.  
5. Solubility of the drug: 
The lipid (fat) solubility of a drug tends to be directly proportional to the degree 
of drug non-ionization. The degree of lipid solubility of a drug often is expressed as its 
lipid partition co-efficient. 
6. Drug absorption and formulation of the drug: 
The absorption of a drug depends on the formulation of the drug. Various inert 
ingredients such as carriers (vehicles), binding agents and coatings are used to prepare 
dosage forms. These substances have major effect on the rate at which the formulation 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 8
dissolve. Drug depot and patches are associated with prolonged or sustained – release 
formulation in veterinary medicine.  
7. Status of the gastrointestinal tract: 
 When drugs are orally administered, the condition of the gastrointestinal tract can 
have a major influence on the rate and extent of drug absorption. Factors such as degree 
of intestinal motility, emptying time of the stomach, irritation or inflammation of mucosa 
etc can affect the rate and extent of absorption of medications.  
DRUG DISTRIBUTION: 
The process by which a drug is carried from its site of absorption to its site of action. 
Highly lipid soluble drugs e.g. halothane given by intravenous injection or by inhalation 
respectively, initially get distributed to organs with high blood flow (e.g. brain, heart, 
kidney). Later, less vascular but more bulky tissue like muscles, fat, visceral take up the 
drug, plasma concentration falls and the drug is then withdrawn from the highly 
vascularized sites into the blood stream. If the site of action of the drug was in one of the 
highly perfused organs (e.g. brain), redistribution results in its termination of action. For 
example, thiopentone causes unconsciousness in 10-20 seconds after administration and 
consciousness returns in 20-30 minutes. 
Volume of distribution:  
The volume of distribution of a drug (V
d
) is the volume of the body fluid 
compartment in which it appears to distribute with a concentration equal to that of the 
plasma. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 9
 A drug that is water soluble (e.g. penicillin sodium) does not enter cells and are 
therefore restricted in distribution, while drugs that are lipid soluble have wide range of 
distribution e.g. xylazine can pass freely into all the fluids compartments. 
Other examples such as warfarin are bound to the protein in the plasma namely 
albumin and have a small volume of distribution 0.1-0.2L/kg. 
Apparent volume of distribution:  
Basic drugs (e.g. amphetamine) are readily taken up by tissues and thus have volume of 
distribution larger than volume of the entire body, hence the term apparent volume of 
distribution.  
The factors that affect distribution of a drug are as follows  
 Drug lipid solubility  
 Degree of ionization at physiologic pH 
 Extent of binding to plasma and tissue protein and extents of blood perfusion 
from one place to the other. 
 Barriers of tissues or compartment.  
ADVERSE DRUG REACTIONS AND INTERACTIONS 
 No useful drug produces just a single effect. Both desirable and undesirable 
additional effects occur, and so whenever a drug is given, a risk is taken. 
 Adverse drug effect or reaction is any undesirable or unintended consequence of 
drug administration. 
 The severity of adverse reactions has been graded as –  
 Mild/ minor adverse reactions: requires no antidote, therapy, nor is prolongation 
of hospitalization necessary. 
 Moderate adverse reactions: this requires a change in drug therapy or dosage 
regimen, although not necessarily cessation of the drug. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 10
 Severe adverse reactions: potentially life-threatening, causes permanent damage, 
requires discontinuation of the drug and specific treatment of the adverse reaction. 
 Lethal adverse reactions: directly or indirectly contributes to the death of the 
patient. 
 
Prevention of adverse drug reactions 
Adverse drug reactions can be minimized but not altogether eliminated by observing the 
following practices;  
 Avoiding all inappropriate use of drugs in the context of patient’s clinical 
condition. 
 Using appropriate dose, route and frequency of drug administration based on 
patient’s specific variables. 
 Taking into consideration previous history of drug reactions including allergic 
diseases. 
 Ruling out possibility of drug interactions when more than one drug is prescribed, 
 Carrying out appropriate laboratory monitoring (e.g prothrombin time with 
warfarin). 
Predictable, dose-related drug reactions 
Although animals show considerable species and individual variation in their response to 
drugs, most drug toxicity is related to the amount of drug administered, and can occur as 
side-effects, secondary-effects or over-dosage toxicity. 
Side-effects: These are unwanted, but often unavoidable drug effects that are predictable 
from the drug’s pharmacological effects, and occur within therapeutic doses. For 
example, atropine is used in peptic ulcer for its anti-secretory action, and produces 
dryness of the mouth as a side-effect. This makes atropine useful in pre-anaesthetic 
medication to dry salivary and bronchiolar secretions. A side-effect may be based on a 
different phase of action, e.g, the antihistamine, promethazine produces sedation 
(drowsiness) which is unrelated to its anti-allergic action, but makes antihistamines useful 
in motion sickness. Thus, an effect may be therapeutic in one context but be a side-effect 
in another. Oestrogens used in anal adenoma in male dogs can be expected to have a 
feminizing effect, and this is unrelated to their anti-ovulatory action. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 11
 
Many drugs have been developed from observation of side-effects, e.g, sulphonamides 
used as antimicrobial were found to produce hypoglycaemia, copious urine flow and 
acidosis as side-effects. This directed research resulting in the development of oral 
hypoglycaemic sulphonylureas (e.g tolbutamide) and the carbonic anhydrase inhibitor, 
acetazolamide. 
 
Secondary-effects: These are direct consequences of a primary action of the drug, e.g 
suppression of gastrointestinal bacterial flora by oral tetracyclines resulting in diarrhoea. 
This paves the way for superinfection with yeasts and fungi. Also chronic corticosteroid 
therapy weakens host defense mechanisms so that the animal becomes more susceptible 
to infection. 
 
Over-dosage toxicity: This is predictable toxic effect that occurs with dosage in excess 
of the therapeutic range. Some over-dosage toxicity may occur because of drug 
accumulation caused by the patient’s ineffective renal excretion or hepatic metabolism. 
Lethal dose 50 (LD
50
): This is a dose that kills 50% of the animals. 
Effective dose 50 (ED
50
):  A dose that produces the desired effect in 50% of the subjects 
is termed the ED50.  
The therapeutic index (or margin of safety): The ratio of LD
50
 to ED
50
 and is a guide 
to the drug’s safety. It is desirable that the therapeutic index (TI) be large. With most 
drugs, the TI is high (e.g, isometamidium in rats has a TI of 23), but with some drugs, 
this value may be small. For example, digoxin has TI values of 2-2.5 in dogs. 
Unpredictable, non-dose-related drug reactions 
Allergic (or hypersensitivity) reactions: These are immune-mediated, unexpected 
reactions to a drug that are unrelated to the pharmacological actions of the drug and are 
largely independent of dosage. Allergic reactions do not appear to have a high incidence 
in veterinary medicine (perhaps <10% of all drug-related adverse effects). Nevertheless, 
hypersensitivity reactions to some drugs can lead to serious and even fatal consequences. 
They occur in a small percentage of the animals or human population exposed to the drug 
and cannot be produced in others at any dose. Prior sensitization is needed and a latent 
period of at least 1-2 weeks is required after the first exposure. The drug or its metabolite 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 12
acts as an antigen or more commonly hapten and induce production of 
antibody/sensitized lymphocytes. Following subsequent injection of the drug (e.g, 
penicillins, cephalosporins, phenothiazines, immune sera) with its antigenic properties, a 
violent antigen-antibody reaction occurs with widespread release of histamine and other 
chemical mediators of inflammation (serotonin, leukotrienes especially LT-C4, D4,) 
dopamine, heparin, plasma kinins and prostaglandins). Active immunization is almost 
free from this risk. 
Idiosyncratic reaction 
This is a genetically determined abnormal reactivity to a chemical. It is largely restricted 
to certain patients with a particular genotype. For example, thin-skinned or white-skinned 
horses may exhibit exaggerated cholinergic response (panting, profuse salivation, 
sweating, urination, defaecation, muscle tremors, abdominal discomfort and prostration) 
to an injection of imidocarb. Although these reactions are inevitable, when they occur 
unexpectedly for the first time, they may be circumvented by injecting atropine prior to 
the treatment of such horses with imidocarb. In addition, certain uncharacteristic or 
bizarre drug effects due to peculiarities of an individual animal or species occur and for 
which no genotype has been described. For example, the phenothazine cause prolapse of 
the penis in the horse, which may persist for several days. A related but distinct effect 
(priapism) has been reported for acepromazine in horses. Priapism, involving persistent 
engorgement and turgidity of the penis has been described, with turgidity and oedema 
lasting several days.  
Photosensitization 
This is a cutaneous disorder resulting from drug-induced sensitization of the skin to 
sunlight (UV radiation). The reactions are of two types: phototoxic and photoallergic. 
In phototoxic reaction, drug or its metabolite accumulates in the skin, absorbs light and 
undergoes a photochemical reaction followed by a photobiological reaction. This results 
in local tissue damage (sunburn-like erythema, oedema, blister, hyperpigmentation and 
desquamation). Drugs involved in acute phototoxic reactions include tetracyclines 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 13
(especially demeclocycline) and tar products. Drugs causing chronic and low-grade 
sensitization include nalidixic acid, flouroquinolones, thiazides, and phenothiazines. In 
cattle, photosensitization has been observed with the sulphoxide metabolite of 
phenothiazine. It occurs 2-3 days post-treatment with the anthelmintic, and when the 
cattle are exposed to bright sunlight. The affected animals usually show keratitis and 
corneal ulceration. 
Photoallergic reaction: The drug or its metabolite induces a cell-mediated immune 
response. The reaction takes the form of an immediate flare and wheal on exposure to 
sun. Drugs involved include sulphonamides, sulphonylureas, griseofulvin, and 
chlorpromazine. 
Target organ toxicity 
Local irritation: This may manifest as pain, tissue necrosis or damage caused at the site 
of administration of the drug. Aqueous solution of diminazene aceturate injected in 
combination with phenazone as Berenil ® causes severe pain at intramuscular site of 
administration, while isometamidium can induce severe  tissue necrosis if injected 
subcutaneously, or a dose higher than 0.8 mg/kg is given by deep intramuscular injection. 
Local gastric irritation with vomiting is encountered when aspirin is administered orally 
to dogs. 
Specific organotoxicity: When a drug is concentrated in any site, the chances of 
localized toxicity are increased. This can occur in the kidney, where the excreted drug is 
rapidly concentrated by reabsorption of water from the proximal tubule. Degenerative 
change in the renal tubule has been recorded following the use of many drugs such as 
mercurial diuretics, antibiotics (e.g, aminoglycosides, amphotericin B, bacitracin) and 
antiprotozoal agents (eg, imidocarb). Acetylated metabolities of sulphonomides are liable 
to precipitate in the urinary tract and cause crystalluria, particularly in hot weather or 
where water intake is low. The liver is a second very common site of damage because it 
receives drugs in high concentration via the portal vein and also due to its role in drug 
metabolism. Carbon tetrachloride causes centrilobular fatty change in the sheep even 
after a recommended dose. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 14
Medullary depression or myocardial sensitization to adrenaline is common among the 
anaesthetics; CNS stimulation, even leading to convulsions, is a feature of local 
anaesthetic (eg procaine) toxicity. Occasionally, the use of a drug is followed by 
disturbances of the formed elements of blood, either as they circulate or by bone-marrow 
depression. In cats, long-term exposure to chloramphenicol has produced bone marrow 
depression. 
Drug-induced (iatrogenic) illness 
Drug-induced (or iatrogenic) disease is caused by drugs, which persist even after the 
offending drugs have been withdrawn and largely eliminated. Examples of iatrogenic 
diseases include peptic ulcer induced by salicylates and corticosteroids; Parkinsonism 
caused by phenothiazine and other antipsychotics, and hepatitis caused by isoniazid. 
Teratogenicity 
This refers to capacity of a drug to cause a derangement in foetal development (i.e a 
dsymorphorgenic effect) when administered to a pregnant animal. The placenta does not 
strictly constitute a strong barrier and any drug can cross it to a greater or lesser extent. 
The embryo is one of the most dynamic biological systems, and in contrast to mature 
animals, drug effects are often irreversible. The thalidomide disaster in Europe (1958-61) 
focused attention on this type of adverse effect. Thalidomide was introduced in Europe in 
1857 and, based on animal tests, was promoted as a “safe and effective sedative”. It was 
prescribed to pregnant women for giving relief from morning sickness (nausea and 
vomiting). In 1961, the first reports were published suggesting that thalidomide produced 
a rare birth defect called phocomelia (shortening or seal-like limbs) or amelia (complete 
absence of the limbs), when taken between the 24
th
 and 36
th
 day of pregnancy. 
Chemically induced teratogenic and/or embryotoxic effects have been described in 
domestic animals. Cats fed high levels of griseofulvin throughout pregnancy have 
delivered kittens with micro-opththalmia. Parbendazole is reported to be teratogenic in 
sheep when given between days 16 and 24 of pregnancy producing arthrogryposis and 
other limb distortions. In domestic animals, the foetus is most likely to be affected by the 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 15
induction of abortion due to drugs administered in late pregnancy (e.g, purgatives, 
corticosteroids, prostaglandins) administered in  late pregnancy. 
Carcinogenicity 
Carcinogenicity refers to the capacity of a drug to induce or promote neoplastic change. 
Chemical carcinogenesis is well recognized but generally takes several years (10-40) to 
develop. For example, oestrogens administered to pregnant women have induced vaginal 
adenocarcinoma in their daughters some 25 years later. Griseofulvin fed at high levels 
(0.5-2.5% of the diet) for 400 days produced liver tumours in mice. Anticancer drugs (e.g 
cyclophosphamide) have been implicated in chemical carcinogenesis. 
Mutagenicity 
Many carcinogens can damage somatic and germ cells to cause chromosome aberrations 
to appear in the progeny. Therefore, mutagenicity testing, which is more rapid and 
cheaper than conventional carcinogenicity testing, has been developed to detect genetic 
(ie, mutagenic) changes in cells or organisms. Many anticancer agents including 
alkylating agents (eg cyclophosphamide) and purine analogues (eg, 6-mercaptopurine) 
have been shown to elicit mutagenic changes. 
Benefit-to-Risk Ratio 
In every therapeutic endeavour, risks must be weighed against benefits for each particular 
clinical situation. Drug therapy is justified only if the possible benefits outweigh the 
possible risk after considering the qualitative and quantitative impact of using a drug and 
the likely outcome if the drug is withheld. This is the benefit-to-risk assessment. 
Phenylbutazone, for example, occasionally causes death in horses, but is this sufficiently 
frequent to discourage its use in the treatment or prevention of trauma? Diethylstiboestrol 
is a useful growth promoter, but its use has been banned in European countries because of 
reports of its ability to induce cancer in man and animals. Oxytetracycline has caused 
fatal colitis in horses, yet it is a broad-spectrum antibiotic of long half-life. The value of 
the animal would surely be sufficient to sway the clinician to an alternative remedy, 
unless the infection is life threatening and is known to be sensitive only to 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 16
oxytetracycline. If the veterinary clinician decides in favour of therapy, he has also to 
make a cost-benefit decision in the case of food-producing animals. 
Preclinical safety and toxicity testing 
While no chemical can be certified as completely “safe” (or free of risk), it is possible to 
estimate the risk associated with exposure to the chemical under specified conditions if 
appropriate tests are performed.  
Acute toxicity study: Large single doses are given to enable determination of median 
lethal dose, maximum tolerated dose, the toxic symptoms developed in the test animals, 
and the time they appear. At least 3 species of animals (one not a rodent), and 
administration is usually more than once. 
Subacute and chronic toxicity study: Effects of daily doses varying from the expected 
therapeutic doses to levels high enough to produce toxicity in susceptible organs. These 
studies usually last for 90 days (subchronic toxicity), or the lifetime of the test animal (i.e 
2 years in a rodent or longer in non-rodents). At the end of the study, the animals are 
sacrificed and pathologic examinations are conducted to determine target organ toxicity; 
effects on reproductive functions in rats and rabbits, including mating behaviour, fertility, 
parturition, teratology, perinatal and postnatal effects, lactation, etc, immunotoxic, 
mutagenic, carcinogenic or teratogenic potential and an assessment of the drug’s irritant 
and sensitizing properties. 
In vitro toxicity tests: There is a growing interest in in vitro toxicity tests that provide a 
more rapid, cost-effective predictive test for drug toxicity. The greatest emphasis has 
been in the area of mutagenicity, with the most popular test being the Ames bioassay. A 
chemical shown to be a mutagen would also have the potential to be a carcinogen in 
mammalian experimentation. 
Clinical evaluation: Clinical evaluation (or target animal studies) of new drugs is 
conducted in 4 phases.   

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 17
Phase 1: the effects of the new drug as a function of dosage are established in healthy 
target animals. 
Phase 2: the drug is studied in target animal patients to determine its efficacy in the 
treatment of, or prophylaxis against, the disease or symptoms for which the drug is 
intended. 
Phase 3: more widespread clinical trials that may move from the realm of clinical 
investigators to practicing clinicians are carried out to establish efficacy and safety in 
disease animals.  
Phase 4: is the study of the actual use of the drug in veterinary practice. 
DRUG INTERACTIONS 
Drug interactions are said to occur when the pharmacologic response to one drug is 
altered by the presence of a second drug. The expected response may be increased or 
decreased or result in adverse reactions as a result of the interaction. There are several 
mechanisms by which drugs may interact in vivo.  
Drug interactions may be classified as  
 Pharmacokinetic drug interactions - plasma or tissue levels of a drug are altered 
by the presence of another drug. 
 Pharmacodynamic drug interactions - the action or effect of one drug is altered by 
a second drug. 
 Pharmaceutical interactions (or drug incompatibilities) result from chemical or 
physical reactions of drugs mixed in vitro. 
Direct drug interactions: Direct interaction result from chemical or physical 
incompatibility, and may occur in vivo or in vitro. In the treatment of excessive bleeding  
evoked by heparin (an acid drug) with intravenous injection of protamine sulphate (a 
strong base), the protamine combines with heparin to form a stable salt that prevents any 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 18
further anticoagulant activity of heparin. Gentamicin is inactivated by carbenicillin when 
the two are mixed together in vitro for intravenous infusion. Because of the possibility of 
this type of drug interaction, it is generally considered poor practice to mix drugs or 
vehicles in the same syringe. 
Interactions affecting absorption: Because a large number of drugs are administered 
orally, the rate or extent of absorption of drug from the gastrointestinal tract may be 
altered by drugs that increase gastric motility (eg, metoclopramide), or conversely by 
drugs that delay gastric emptying (eg, anticholinergic drugs such as atropine). 
Tetracyclines can combine with polyvalent ions such as calcium, magnesium, aluminium 
and iron to form complexes that are poorly absorbed. Milk and milk products, and 
numerous antacids can markedly reduce the absorption of tetracyclines, and should not be 
co-administered orally. Antidiarrhoeal preparations are capable of adsorbing co-
administered drugs. For example, a kaolin (hydrated aluminium silicate) pectin mixture 
can produce erratic absorption of lincomycin when the two are given simultaneously. The 
bioavailability of diminazene aceturate following intramuscular administration alone as 
Ganaseg® is 95% when administered in combination with phenazone (a pain killer) as 
Berenil ®, its bioavailability is reduced to 50%. 
Interactions affecting distribution: Drugs may compete for binding sites on the plasma 
or tissue proteins, or may displace previously bound drug. Displacement from plasma or 
tissue binding site would tend to increase the blood concentration of the displaced drug. 
Phenylbutazone (an anti-inflammatory agent) may compete with phenytoin for binding to 
albumin. Similarly, phenylbutazone is able to displace warfarin (an anticoagulant) from 
its binding site and enhance the free circulating concentration of the anticoagulant. The 
displacement is responsible for many cases of warfarin poisoning. Sulphonamides 
(chemotherapeutic agents) are able to displace sulphonylureas (oral antidiabetic agents) 
and cause severe hypoglycaemia. Such a mechanism may contribute to the elevation of 
serum digoxin concentration by concurrent quinidine therapy. 
Interactions at drug receptor sites: Drugs may interact at receptor sites in a competitive 
manner, eg, morphine-naloxone, or by interference with the pathway to the receptor site. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 19
Some of the most commonly recognized interactions (both therapeutically useful and 
potentially dangerous), come into this group. For example, aminoglycoside antibiotics 
(streptomycin, neomycin, gentamicin) produce skeletal neuromuscular blockade, similar 
to that which occurs with tubocurarine or gallamine. The mechanism involves 
competition with acetylcholine for its receptors at the skeletal neuromuscular junction. 
Thus, combinations of aminoglycosides and non-depolarizing neuromuscular blockers 
can lead to excessive muscle relaxation. Cardiac glycosides act by inhibiting the enzyme 
transporter Na+/K+-ATPase that regulates the transport of Na+ and K+ across the 
myocardial cell membrane. The inhibition of the pump results in decrease in the 
concentration of intracellular K+. This effect is likely to be responsible, at least in part, 
for the increased toxic effects of glycosides to patients also receiving diuretics. It is 
generally recommended that potassium supplement be considered for all, especially 
congestive heart failure patients being treated with cardiac glycosides. 
Interactions altering metabolism: Some drugs are able to stimulate the production of 
drug-metabolizing enzymes. Drug interactions, usually involving a loss of therapeutic 
activity, may result from the consequent increase in the rate of metabolism. This type of 
interaction is particularly important when the drugs are involved in the maintenance of 
vital functions, such as control of blood pressure, clotting or sugar levels. Phenobarbitone 
is one of the most well known enzyme-inducing drugs. Clinically significant interaction 
can occur when it is used in combination with phenytoin in the treatment of epilepsy. 
Adjustment of phenytoin dosage in these circumstances may be required to avoid 
therapeutic failure. Phenobarbitone has also been shown to reduce the therapeutic 
efficacy of concurrent administration of phenylbutazone or phenytoin. 
Drug metabolism may be inhibited by the presence of other drugs. This would result in 
prolonging of the biological half-life of the drug and an increase in therapeutic efficacy. 
Of course, potentiation of toxicity is also possible. Drugs that are most likely to be 
involved in clinically important interactions of this type are these with a low therapeutic 
index, where inhibition of metabolism is likely to cause toxic effects. Chloramphenicol is 
a potent inhibitor of microsomal protein synthesis. Thus, other drugs administered 
concurrently show marked increases in potency. For example, the duration of 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 20
pentobarbitone-induced anaesthesia in cats and dogs is greatly prolonged following 
chloramphenicol therapy. The potentiation effect can still be seen 3 weeks after cessation 
of chloramphenicol administration in dogs. 
Interactions affecting renal excretion: The renal excretion of drugs can be altered by 
concurrent drug therapy. Drugs that alter blood flow to the kidney modify the renal 
clearance of other drugs. For example, water or osmotic diuresis increases drug excretion 
rates. Also, since only free drug is filtered at the glomerulus, drugs that displace others 
from protein-binding sites may increase the rate of renal excretion of the displaced drug. 
Furthermore,  competition for tubular transport carries will also alter the excretion of 
competing drugs. For example, probenecid interferes with active tubular secretion of 
penicillin, thereby prolonging its duration of action. Drugs that alter urinary pH can alter 
the extent of tubular reabsorption of ionisable drugs. Drugs that acidify the urine such as 
ascorbic acid or ammonium chloride increase the urinary excretion of weak bases (e.g 
amphetamine, diazepam). 
INTRODUCTION TO NEUROPHARMACOLOGY 
 
The Nervous System is divided into two anatomical divisions: 
 The Central Nervous System (C.N.S) - the brain and spinal cord 
 The Peripheral Nervous System (P.N.S) - the neurons located outside the brain 
and spinal cord, that is, any nerve that enters or leaves the C.N.S. The PNS is 
further divided into the efferent nerves that carry signals away from the brain and 
spinal cord to the peripheral tissues and the afferent division, whose neurons bring 
information from the periphery to C.N.S.  
 The efferent division of the P.N.S. can be further divided into two major 
functional subdivisions: The Somatic and the Autonomic Nervous System. 
 The Somatic efferents are involved in voluntarily controlled body functions such 
as contraction of skeletal muscles in locomotion or posture. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 21
 The Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) functions involuntarily to regulate 
essential body functions. 
The Autonomic Nervous System (ANS) 
The ANS is composed primarily of visceral motor (efferent) neurons that innervate 
smooth muscles of the viscera, cardiac muscles, vasculature, and the exocrine glands. 
The Autonomic Efferent Neurons 
The efferent neurons of the ANS are anatomically divided into two namely: 
1. Sympathetic (or thoracolumbar). 
2. Parasympathetic (or  Craniosacral) 
Both the sympathetic and the parasympathetic neurones emerge from the brain stem or 
spinal cord and terminate in the motor ganglia. The function of the ganglia is that it relays 
information between the preganglionic neurone and the postganglionic neuron. The 
preganglionic fibres of the sympathetic nervous system are short. They end in ganglia 
adjacent to the spinal cord. The only exception is the adrenal medulla’s preganglionic 
fibre which is analogous to a postganglionic fibre, because it releases epinephrine and 
norepinephrine directly. These neurotransmitters are released into the blood stream when 
stimulated by preganglionic fibers. It is important to note that the postganglionic 
sympathetic fibres are long like the preganglionic fibers of the Parasympathetic 
Nervous System which are generally long, while the postganglionic fibres are short. 
The physiologic functions of the two systems usually oppose one another to bring about a 
state of balance. When the balance is disrupted, drug therapy may be indicated to restore 
the original balance necessary for homeostasis.  
The Sympathetic (adrenergic) Nervous System Receptors 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 22
The receptors are divided into 
1. Alpha-1 
2. Alpha-2 
3. Beta-1 
4. Beta-2 
5. Dopaminergic 
Generally the alpha-1 and alpha-2 are stimulatory and the beta receptors are inhibitory.  
The Parasympathetic Nervous System Receptors 
The Parasympathetic (cholinergic) Nervous System receptors are nicotinic and 
muscarinic receptors.  
Neurotransmitters: 
The primary neurotransmitters of the adrenergic sites are norepinerphrine, 
epinerphrine, and dopamine. Epinephrine stimulates the alpha and beta receptors and is 
a potent stimulator of the heart and a powerful dilator of the bronchioles. 
Acetylcholine is the neurotransmitter at the sympathetic postganglionic fibre of the sweat 
glands and blood vessels. The neurotransmitter for cholinergic sites is acetylcholine. 
Acetylcholine combines with both nicotinic and muscarinic receptors.  
Cholinergic sites are found in both the sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous 
Systems. The nicotinic receptors are found in all the Autonomic ganglia, in the 
Adrenal medulla and at the neuromuscular junction of the somatic nervous system. 
The muscarinic receptors are found at the synapse of postganglionic fibres of the 
parasympathetic nervous system and at few of the sympathetic postganglionic 
fibres. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 23
How Drugs Affect the Autonomic Nervous System 
1. Mimicking neurotransmitters 
2. Interfering with neurotransmitter release 
3. Interfering with the breakdown or reuptake of neurotransmitters at the synapse  
4. Blocking the attachment of neurotransmitters to receptors. 
Classes of Autonomic Nervous System Agents 
Cholinergic agents are drugs that stimulate receptors sites mediated by acetylcholine. 
This is achieved by the drug mimicking the action of acetylcholine. This could be done in 
two ways:  
1) The drug might have a direct action  
2) The drug might have an indirect  action on the receptors 
The drug is said to have a direct action on the receptors when it sensitizes the receptor by 
mimicking acetylcholine. The drug is said to be indirectly acting when it inhibits the 
breakdown of acetylcholine. The cholinergic drugs (agents) are also called 
parasympathomimetic drugs. 
Clinical Uses  
1. Aids in diagnosis of myasthenia gravis  
2. Reduce the intraocular pressure of the glaucoma  
3. Stimulate GI motility  
4. Treat urinary retention  
5. Control vomiting  
6. Act as an antidote for neuromuscular blockers. 
 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 24
Examples of Direct-acting Cholinergic Agents 
1. Carbamylcholine:- It had been used to treat atony of the gastrointestinal tract and 
to stimulate uterine contraction in swine.  
2. Bethanechol (urecholine):- Used in G.I and urinary tract atony.  
3. Pilocarpine:- It is used to treat glaucoma by reducing the intraocular pressure.  
4. Metoclopramide:- It is used to control vomiting.  
Indirect-acting Cholinergic (Anticholinesterase) Agents  
1. Endophonium:  Is used to diagnose myasthenia gravis.  
2. Neostigmine:  These products are used to treat urinary retention, GI atony and as 
antidote to neuro-muscular blocking agents.  
3. Organophophate Compounds:  These are commonly used as insecticide dips 
and may result in toxicity if not appropriately used.  
4. Demecarium: This is used in the preventive management of glaucoma.  
Side effects of cholinergic drugs  
Bradycardia, hypotension, lacrimation, diarrhoea, vomiting.  
Cholinergic Blocking Agents (Anticholinergics)  
Cholinergic blocking agents are drugs that oppose the effect of acetylcholine and this 
group of drugs elicit their effect at the muscarinic receptors of the Parasympathetic 
Nervous System.  
Examples:  
1. Atropine:  It is used as a pre-anaesthetic drug to dry secretions and prevent 
bradycardia. It is also used to treat organophosphate poisoning. 
      2. Scopolamine:  This is used in anti diarrhea medication.  

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 25
3. Methscopolamine: Similar to the effect of Scopolamine.   
4. Glycopyrrolate:   Is a quaternary ammonium compound with action similar to 
atropine, but has provides longer action than atropine and is used as a preanaesthetic 
agent. 
5.  Aminopentamide: Is used to control diarrhea in dogs and cats.  
6.  Pralidoxime (2-PAM): A cholinesterase reactivator used to treat organophosphate 
intoxication. 
Side effects: 
Drowsiness, disorientation, tachycardia, photophobia, constipation, anxiety, burning at 
site of injection. 
Adrenergic (Sympathomimetic Agents)  
Adrenergic agents are agents that mimick the action of epinephrine or norepinephrine. 
Adrenergic agents are classified as catecholamines or non-catecholamines and either of 
these categories can be classified according to the specific receptor types activated 
namely: 
1.  Alpha -1 
2.  Alpha -2 
3.  Beta -1 
4.  Beta -2 
Examples  
1. Epinephrine (Adrenaline):   Used to increase heart rate and cardiac output and 
constriction of the blood vessels in the skin. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 26
2. Norepinephrine:   Stimulates alpha receptors. It influences vasopressor effect 
and raises the blood pressure. 
3. Isoproterenol:  It is a beta stimulator it is used as a bronchodilator.  
4. Dopamine:  Dopamine is a precursor of epinephrine and norephinephrine. It is 
dose dependent and to treat shock and congestive heart failure.  
5. Ephedrine, Terbutaline, Albuterol: these are beta agonists and are 
brochodilators.  
6. Phenylpropanolamine (prolamine): Is used to treat urinary incontinence in 
dogs.  
Side effects:  
   Tachycardia, hypertension, nervousness, cardiac arrhythmias, pulmonary oedema.  
Adrenergic Blocking Agents   
Adrenergic blocking agents are used to disrupt the activity of sympathetic nervous 
system.    The adrenergic blocking agents are classified as: 
a) Alpha blockers  
b) Beta blockers  
c) Ganglionic blockers  
Alpha Blockers  
 Alpha blockers have limited use in veterinary medicine  
 The most frequently used in veterinary medicine is Phenoxybenzamine  
1) Phenoxybenzamine could be used in 
a)  Laminitis treatment in horses  
b)  Urethral obstruction in cats. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 27
2) Tranquilizers (acepromazine, droperidol) - These tranquilizers act as alpha blockers 
and cause vasodilation. 
3)  Prazosin:- is used as an hypotensive agent. 
4)  Yohimbine:- used to treat xylazine toxicity. 
 5)  Atipamezole:- this is a reversal agent of medetomidine 
Side effects of alpha receptor blockers 
 Hypotension, tachycardia, muscle tremors (phenoxybenzamine), seizures 
(acepromazine). 
Beta blockers 
Used to treat glaucoma, arrhythmias, and hypertrophic cardiomyopathy. 
Examples 
1. Propranolol:- is used to treat cardiac arrhythmia and hypertrophic 
cardiomyopathy. 
2. Timolol:-  is an ophthalmic preparation that is to treat glaucoma. 
3. Atenolol:- used in a similar way to propranolol. 
Side effects of B-Blockers 
Bradycardia, hypotension, worsening heart failure, bronchoconstriction. 
 
INTRODUCTORY TOXICOLOGY; SOURCES AND TYPES OF POISON, 
ANTIDOTAL THERAPY 
 
Definitions: 
 Toxicology: It is the science or study of poisons on biologic systems, 
including their properties, actions and effects. Also their detection and 
identification, the treatment and prevention of the conditions produced by 
them. 
 Toxicant: Any poisonous agent 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 28
 Toxins/Biotoxins: Poisons produced by biologic sources e.g venom, plant 
toxins. 
 Toxicosis/ Poisoning/ Intoxication: Any disease produced by a toxicant 
 Acute toxicosis: Effects during the first 24 hours 
 Chronic toxicosis: Effects produced by prolonged exposure (> 3months) 
 Toxicity: Refers to the amount of a toxicant necessary to produce a 
detrimental effect. 
 Hazard: Describes the likelihood of poisoning under conditions of use. 
 Toxicant accumulation/ biomagnifications: Occurs when absorption exceeds 
the ability of the body to destroy or excrete a xenobiotic compound. 
 Ecotoxicology: The study of the relationship of potentially toxic chemicals in 
living organisms and their environment. 
 Tolerance: The ability of an organism to show less response to a specific dose 
of a chemical than it demonstrated on a previous exposure; refers to acquired 
and not innate resistance. 
 LD 
50
: The dose that is lethal to 50% of a test sample or population. 
Expression of toxicant concentrations are in ppb or ppm in feedstuff, water, 
air, tissue etc. Other expressions of dose are maximum nontoxic dose, 
maximum tolerated dose, approximate lethal dose.  
Toxicology as a discipline 
 It is a multifaceted science 
 It contributes to, and draws from fields such as chemistry, pharmacology, 
pathology, psychology, clinical medicine, botany etc. 
 Is toxicology a chemical or biological science? 
Who are toxicologists? 
 Toxicologists are persons trained in the knowledge of poisons. 
 They may have been trained solely in this specialty or more often than not, 
they were trained as veterinarians, physicians, chemists, physiologists, 
pharmacologists, entomologists, botanists, agronomists and some other 
specialties. 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 29
 The common factor is an interest in learning more about the undesirable 
effects of substances and energies on living organisms and their environment. 
Veterinary Toxicologist 
 A person having special knowledge of the poisons affecting the animals and 
birds in which man is interested for his economic gain or pleasure, and of 
those substances which, when present in animal products, could injure the 
health of the people consuming them. 
 He is also concerned with the determination of the safety of drugs, chemicals 
and energies intended for direct use by people (the best qualified to evaluate 
the results of animal experiment action which usually preceed human usage). 
Environmental Toxicology 
 Chemicals released into the environment abound there to elicit their 
deleterious effects on the ecology where man, animals and other organisms 
interact. 
 The delicate interactions is altered by these chemicals with devastating effects 
on man and animals. 
Factors affecting the activity of poisons 
Exposure-related, biologic or chemical factors regulate absorption, metabolism and 
elimination and accordingly, influence the clinical consequences. 
Factors related to exposure: 
 Dose 
 Duration and frequency of exposure 
 Route of exposure 
 Time of exposure 
 Environmental factors e.g temperature, humidity etc 
Biologic factors: 
 Species of animal  
 Age and size of animal  
 Sex and hormonal factor of animal  
 Nutritional and dietary factor 
 Health status 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 30
Chemical factors: 
 Chemical nature of the toxicant 
 Vehicle/Carrier 
Diagnosis 
 History 
 Clinical signs 
 P/M lesions 
 Laboratory examinations 
 Bioassay/ Animal inoculation 
Treatment of Poisoning 
General Considerations: 
 Each clinical case of poisoning presents individual problems 
 More often than not, approach to treatment is determined by  
i. Nature of poison involved 
ii. Condition of the patient 
Principles of therapy: 
1. Prevention of further absorption 
2. Supportive or symptomatic treatment 
3. Specific antidote 
Prevention of further absorption: 
-  Remove the source of poison or remove the animals from the area in which the poison 
exist. 
-  Limit the absorption of material already in or on the animal for topical chemicals. 
Wash the animal or remove contaminated hair or wool. 
-  For ingested toxicants: 
 Induce vomiting eg apomorphine 
 Gastric lavage is useful in smaller animals 
 Rumenotomy in ruminants 
 Purgation when slow-acting poisons are involved. 
 Activated charcoal serves to adsorb poison in the stomach 
 

http://www.unaab.edu.ng 
 
 31
Supportive Therapy: 
-  Control of seizures 
-  Maintenance of respiration 
-  Treatment for shock 
-  Correction of electrolyte and fluid balance 
-  Control of cardiac function 
-  Alleviation of pain 
Specific Treatment (Antidotal therapy): 
-  This is application of drugs to reverse or neutralize the effect of the poison.  
-  Specific antidotes for the treatment of poisoning are highly desirable but rather rare. 
-  Some antidotes form complexes with the toxicant (e.g the oximes bind with 
organophosphates), others block or compete for receptor sites e.g vitamin K competes 
with the receptor for coumarin anticoagulants such as warfarin and a few affect 
metabolism of the toxicant e.g ferric to ferrous reduction with methylene blue in nitrate 
poisoning. 
 
  
 
 