

11/14/2025
1
Topic 3: Marketing Functions 
雒ｱTopic Outline:
雞ｧUnderstanding Marketing Functions
雞ｧImportance of Agricultural Marketing System
雞ｧMarketing Research
雞ｧMarketing Agencies/Intermediaries
雞ｧMarketing Strategy
雞ｧUnique features of Agricultural Markets
51
Marketing Functions 
Marketing Function:Any activity performed in carrying a product from
point of production to point of consumption (any activity carried out
within the agri-marketing chain).
窶｢E.g. Transportation, storage, grading, processing, packaging.
Classification of Market Functions:
雞ｧPhysical Functions-Physically handle a product as it is moving in the chain
:
難ｼStorage/Warehousing
難ｼGrading
難ｼProcessing
難ｼTransportation
難ｼPackaging
52

11/14/2025
2
Classification of Market Functions...
雞ｧExchange Functions-performed to transfer products from sellers to buyers
:
難ｼBuying
難ｼSelling
雞ｧFacilitative Functions-provide services to the agri-marketing chain the
ensure the smooth, efficient and effective performance of the chain
:
難ｼStandardization (role of Malawi Bureau of Standards)
難ｼFinancing (Financial Institutions)
難ｼRisk Management (Insurance Companies)
難ｼCapacity building/Training
難ｼDissemination of Market Information (Media, e.g. Radio Stations)
53
Importance of Agricultural Marketing System
雒ｱIncrease Farm Income
難ｼAn efficient marketing system ensures higher levels of income for farmers
難ｼAn efficient system guarantees farmers better prices for farm products.
難ｼRetained earnings ensure investment in modern techs. & inputs to boost
productivity and production.
難ｼCreates opportunities of generating Forex
雒ｱWidening of Markets
難ｼAn efficient marketing system widens the market for agricultural products.
難ｼWidening of markets helps in increasing demand, thereby guaranteeing
higher incomes for producers.
54

11/14/2025
3
Importance of Agricultural Marketing...
雞ｧGrowth of Agro-based Industries-Efficient agricultural marketing helps to
grow agro-based industries and development of the economy.
雞ｧPrice Signals-A marketing system helps farmers to plan their production in
accordance with prevailing or expected market prices.
雞ｧSpread of New Agri-Technology
雞ｧCreation of Employment Opportunities
難ｼEmployment is created in various activities, such as packaging,
transportation, storage and processing.
55
Marketing Strategies: P窶冱 of Marketing (Marketing Mix)
難ｼProduct-Should meet customer needs
難ｼPrice-Should be affordable but competitive
難ｼPromotion-Advertising,   Public   Relations   (e.g.   Corporate   Social
Responsibility)
難ｼPlace-Convenient, Accessible, Secure.
難ｼPeople-Everyone working in a business organisation should embrace
the concept of marketing
難ｼProcess-Systems  used  to  interact  or  assist  customers  should  be
considerate, user-friendly & supportive..
難ｼPhysical   location:Location   where   the   business   organisation
undertakes its operations should be accessible, secure and appealing
56

11/14/2025
4
Marketing Research:
難ｼMarket Research issystematic collection, analysis and interpretation of
data from groups of people in order to guide decisions on a wide
range of products or buyer behaviour.
雞ｧProvides market actors with information about market dynamics (e.g. market
prices, supply of commodities, behaviour of other market actors, prevailing
government controls, key market challenges)
雞ｧThrough market research market actors understand key market opportunities
and challenges and formulates competitive strategies.
難ｼAreas for market research depend on one窶冱 business needs.
難ｼMarket Research is very important activity but ignored by many
market actors.
57
Procedure for Market Research
雒ｱQualitative Method and/or Quantitative Methods
雒ｱThrough Primary Data and/or Secondary Data
雞ｧQualitative Research: Concerned with in-depth understanding of complex social
and business issues.
難ｼThis type of research is concerned with answering theWhy or Howquestions.
雞ｧConcerned with finding out real motivations, attitudes, preferences and behaviours.
難ｼApproaches:Focus Group Discussions; Key Informant Interviews; Rapid Rural
Appraisal; Participatory Rural Appraisal Methods; and Case studies.
58

11/14/2025
5
Procedure for Market Research
雒ｱQuantitative method
難ｼConcerned with statistical measurements (e.g. figures or percentages).
難ｼUsually involves a large sample size to adequately represent the
population of focus.
雒ｱPrimary Research-consists of collecting first-hand information from a
population of concern for the first time.
雒ｱSecondary Research-Involves collecting data and analysis of data, and
presentation of information from existing literature (e.g. study reports,
research bulletins, industry journals).
59
Importance of Market Research 
雒ｱImportance is judged from perspectives of both market actors (e.g.
Producers, Middlemen & Buyers)& policy makers (e.g. Government
Institutions).
雒ｱGenerally:
難ｼAccurate, adequate & timely market information facilitates decision-
making about when and where to sell/buy products.
難ｼCreates a competitive market process and checks growth of
monopolies or unscrupulous market agencies.
60

11/14/2025
6
Importance of Market Research...
雒ｱProducers:
難ｼHelps in decision-making over product to produce (what?); time of
production (when to produce?), Location of production (where to produce)
and over choice of marketing agency (whom to sell produce through?)
雒ｱMarket Middlemen:
難ｼTo plan purchases, storage and sale of agricultural products.
雒ｱGovernment Institutions:
難ｼFor establishment of effective policies;
難ｼregulation and control of market conduct and formulation of agri.
development strategies.
61
Marketing Agencies/Intermediaries
雞ｧVery few farm produce move directly from farmers to consumers.
雞ｧMost  farm  products  move  to  consumers  through  several
agencies/institutions and channels.
雞ｧAgencies also help in expanding markets for farm products and add value
to the products.
62

11/14/2025
7
Marketing Agencies/Intermediaries
雞ｧThe following agencies are involved in agric. Marketing:
1. Producers
2. Middlemen:
雒ｱMerchant Middlemen (e.g.:Wholesalers, Retailers, Itinerant Traders and
Village Agents)
雒ｱAgent Middlemen (e.g.:Commission Agents, Brokers)
雒ｱSpeculative Middlemen
雒ｱFacilitative Middlemen (
Labourers, weigh men, Graders, Transport Agency)
3. Processors
63
Marketing Agencies...
雒ｱProducers
難ｼSome farmers sell surplus produce
難ｼSome large farmers assemble produce of small farmers, transport it to
nearby market & sell at a profit-perform functions of market
middlemen.
雒ｱMiddlemen
難ｼIndividuals or businesses who perform various marketing functions
between production and consumption stages
難ｼMiddlemen are in different classes:
64

11/14/2025
8
Marketing Agencies: Merchant Middlemen
難ｼTake title or ownership of the products they handle.
難ｼBuy and sell on their own and gain or lose
Functions of Merchant middlemen:
難ｼAssemble goods from various localities
難ｼGrade goods
難ｼBalance flow of goods by storing them in peak season and releasing them in off-
season;
難ｼMay assess demand of prospective buyers and processors from time to time, and
plan movement of goods over space and time.
65
Middlemen...Merchant Middlemen
雒ｱWholesalers:
難ｼBuy and sell produce in large quantities.
難ｼBuy either directly from farmers or from other wholesalers.
難ｼSell to retailers, other wholesalers and processors.
雒ｱRetailers:
難ｼBuy goods from wholesalers and sell them to consumers in small quantities.
難ｼThey are producers' representatives to consumers.
雞ｧRetailers  may  be  agents  for  gathering  and  dissemination  of  information  for
producers
66

11/14/2025
9
雒ｱItinerant Traders:
難ｼThese middlemen move from village to village, and directly purchase
agric. produce from the producers.
難ｼThey transport produce to nearby primary or secondary markets-they
act as small wholesalers
雒ｱVillage merchants/Traders:
難ｼPurchase  produce  of  farmers  who  either  take  finance  from  them  or
those farmers who fail to take their produce to the market.
難ｼMay also provide finance to finance-poor farmers.
難ｼOften visit nearby markets and keep in touch with prevailing prices.
難ｼEither sell the collected produce in nearby market or retain it for sale at
a later date in the same village
67
Middlemen...Agent Middlemen
難ｼAct as representatives of either buyers or sellers.
難ｼDo not have ownership of goods/produce.
難ｼThey merely negotiate the purchase and/or sale contracts.
難ｼReceive income in the form ofcommissionorbrokerage.
雒ｱCommission Agents:
難ｼControl physical handling of the produce
難ｼArrange for selling of produce
難ｼCollects payment from buyers,
難ｼDeducts their expenses and payment(commission)
難ｼRemits the balance to the seller.
68

11/14/2025
10
Middlemen...Agent Middlemen
雒ｱBrokers:
難ｼThese middlemen do not physically control the product.
難ｼThey  bring  together  buyers  and  sellers  on  the  same  platform  for
negotiations.
難ｼTheir charge is calledbrokerage.
難ｼMay claim brokerage from the buyer, the seller or both.
難ｼHave  complete  knowledge  of  the  market窶登f  the  quantity,  quality  of
available products and their prices.
69
Speculative Middlemen
難ｼTake ownership/title of the product.
難ｼThey are not regular buyers or sellers of produce.
難ｼBuy  produce  when  prices  are  low  and  sell  in  the  off-season  when
prices are high.
難ｼMake profit from short-run as well as long-run price fluctuations.
70

11/14/2025
11
Facilitative Middlemen
難ｼProvide services to smoothen functioning of the marketing process.
難ｼReceive  their  income  in  the  form  of  fees  or  service  charges  from
agencies who benefit from their services.
Examples:
雞ｧLabourers
雞ｧWeigh men
雞ｧGraders
雞ｧTransport Agencies
雞ｧCommunication Agencies
雞ｧAuctioneers
71
Processors
難ｼSome  processors  employ  agents  to  buy  agric.  produce  for  them,
store the produce and process it throughout the year.
72

11/14/2025
12
Unique Characteristics/Features of Agric. Markets
雒ｱPerishability of Products:Most farm products have short shelf-life.
雒ｱSeasonality  of  Production:Farm  products  are  produced  in  a  particular
season; they cannot be produced throughout the year. In the harvest season,
prices fall.
雒ｱBulkiness  of  Products/Unprocessed  goods:Makes  their  transportation
and storage difficult and expensive.
雒ｱVariation in Quality of Products:There is a large variation in the quality of
agricultural  products,  which  makes  grading  and  standardization  somewhat
difficult.
雒ｱIrregular  Supply  of  Agricultural  Products:The  supply  of  agricultural
products  is  uncertain and irregular  because of their  dependence on  natural
factors. With varying supply, demand remaining almost constant, the prices of
agricultural products fluctuate substantially.
雒ｱSmall Land-holding Sizes and Scattered Production:Farm  productions
are scattered across the country and most of the producers are of small size.
Estimation   of   supply   is   difficult   and   creates   problems   in   marketing
(aggregation of producers is hard).
73