

SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
LILONGWE UNIVERSITY OF AGRICULTURE AND NATURAL 
RESOURCES (LUANAR)
NATURAL RESOURCES COLLEGE (NRC)
EVANCE CHAIMA, Ph.D.

COURSE ASSESSMENT 
Continuous assessment
•Practical sessions 
•Group assignments
•Individual assignments
•Mid semester examinations 
End of semester
40%
60%
Percent
Continuous assessment
End of semester

COURSE OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION
PRINCIPLES OF SOIL CONSERVATION
INTEGRATED APPROACHES TO SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
ROCKS
SOIL GENESIS (ORIGIN OF SOIL)
SOIL AND ITS COMPOSITION

SOILPROPERTIES
PHYSICALCHEMICALS
CHEMICALPROPERTIES
BIOLOGICALPROPORTIESOFSOIL
SOILFERTILITY
FERTLIZERS
INORGANICFERTILIZER
ORGANICFARTILIZER
SOILEROSIONANDCONSERVATION
ESTIMATINGSOILLOSS
PHYSICALSOILANDWATERCONSERVATIONMEASURES
BOILOGICALCONSERVATIONMEASURES
LANDUSECAPABILITYCLASSIFICATIONANDLANDUSEPLANNING
VILLAGEBASEDCATCHMENTCONSERVATION

Recommended books
•Bunderson W.T et al (2002) Land care practices in Malawi. Malawi Agroforestry 
Extension Project
•Barrow C. (1987) Water Resources and Agriculture Development in the Tropics

INTRODUCTION

Soil
Soil is the biologically active and porous medium developed in the 
uppermost layer of Earth’s crust. It serves as the reservoir of water and 
nutrients and a medium for the filtration and breakdown of injurious 
wastes. It also helps cycle carbon and other elements through the global 
ecosystem.

Water
It is a clear, colorless, odorless, and tasteless liquid that 
may also occur in various forms such as gas (water 
vapor) and solid (ice).

Importance of soils (FAO – UN)
•Soils help adapt to climate change by reducing (GHG)in the atmosphere;
•Soils allow for water infiltration, filtering pollutants and preventing them from 
leaching into the groundwater;
•Soils capture and store water for crops, whereas degraded soils retain less water;
•Reducing surface evaporation and increasing water use efficiency and 
productivity are also processes enhanced by healthy soils;
•Soils provide fiber, fuel, medicinal products, and other ecosystem services;
•Soils keep 25% of BD and they are a key part of the global cycles that make all life 
possible.

Importance of water
•Domestic    Agricultural    Industrial 

Production constraints faced by farmers due to poor conservation 
practices
Crop production 
•Loss of fertility--     More fertilizers  
•Loss of arable land--     Higher costs to restore the land 
•Reduced agricultural output--   Losses 
•Poor performance of the economy--   Poverty and underdevelopment
Fish farming 
•Pollution of water bodies--    Death of fish  
•Sedimentation of water bodies--   Shallow water bodies (costly to restore)
•Reduced fish & Aquaculture output--  Losses
•Speedy decline of water levels--   Dig deeper (more costs)
•Increased incidents of flooding/damages (ponds)-- Rebuilding (costly)

Why conserve soil and water?
Short term goals
•Enhance soil fertility
•Minimize soil loss
•Increase water infiltration 
Long term goals
•Enhance global water balance (Water reserves)
•Promote catchment conservation
•Increase agricultural production
•Improve economic performance (Household, community, National)
•Biodiversity conservation and ecosystem preservation 
•Climate change mitigation and adaptation

THE HYDROLOGICAL CYCLE

SOIL EROSION

Soil Erosion
•Soil erosion is defined as theaccelerated removal of topsoil from the 
land surface through water, wind and tillage (FAO)
•Soil erosion occurs naturally under all climatic conditions but it is 
significantly increased and accelerated by unsustainable human 
activities throughintensive agriculture, deforestation, overgrazing 
and improper land use changes.
•Soil erosion rates are much higher than soil formation rates, meaning 
its loss and degradation is not recoverable within a human lifespan.
•Note: Acceptable 2 – 5 Tons/Ha/yr
•In Malawi Avg 15 Tons/Ha/yr (Range 10 -45)

SOIL EROSION PROCESS 
STAGE 1 – Dislodgement
This involves disruption of soil structure and 
detachment of soil particles.
•Silt is usually preferentially dislodged and 
transported.
•Clay particles tend to be flocculated and 
combined in aggregates which increase 
their mass.
•Sand particles are larger and heavy.

STAGE 2 – Transportation/Runoff
Detached soil particles move from initial point to a different 
location due to influence of wind or water.
The transportation take place in three ways:
i) Suspension– When the particles of soil are very small (less 
than 0.1 mm) they are carried over long distances
ii) Saltation– In saltation soil particles of medium size (0.10-
0.15 mm diameter) (is a specific type of particle transport by 
fluids such as wind or water. It occurs when loose materials are 
removed from a bed and carried by the fluid, before being 
transported back to the surface. Examples include pebble 
transport by rivers, sand drift over desert surfaces, soil blowing 
over fields, and snow drift over smooth surfaces

STAGE 2 – Transportation/Runoff
Detached soil particles move from initial point to a different 
location due to influence of wind or water.
The transportation take place in three ways:
iii) Soil Creep – This is rolling or sliding of soil particles along 
the surface of the particles (0.5-1.0 mm diameter). 

3. Deposition of soil particles
The process by which sediment settles out of 
the water or wind that is carrying it, and is 
depositedin a new location.
Occurs when the velocity and carrying capacity 
of runoff decreases. 

PRINCIPLES OF SOIL CONSERVATION
i. Minimisation of the effects of the raindrop
Interposing a buffer between the raindrops and the soil surface to absorb the energy of the 
falling raindrops and prevent detachment and/or compaction of soil particles.
ii. Minimisation of the volume and velocity of the flowing water.
Making sure that that water can readily soak through the soil profile and conducting any 
excess runoff safely away at non-erosive velocities.
iii. Ensuring that annual rate of soil loss does not exceed the natural rate of soil 
formation.
Aligning types of uses with high risk of permitting erosion to areas of land with a small 
hazard of being eroded. It is necessary to put into its best use for maximum productivity at 
a minimum soil loss.

Types of Soil Erosion

Splash erosion
•It occurs when raindrops hit bare soil. 
•The raindrops impact breaks up soil 
aggregates so that individual soil 
particles form. 
•The splashed particles spread from the 
point of impact.

Rill erosion
•Rill erosionoccurs when runoff water forms 
small channels as it concentrates down a 
slope.
•These rills can be up to 0.3m deep. 
•Water to cut through the soil, creating small 
channels.

Sheet erosion
•Sheet erosionoccurs as a shallow 'sheet' of 
water flowing over the ground surface, 
resulting in the removal of a uniform layer of 
soil. 
•Sheet erosion occurs when rainfall intensity is 
greater than infiltration.
•It often occurs on a gentle of flat terrain 

Gully erosion
•Gully erosionoccurs when water is channelled 
across unprotected land and washes away the 
soil along the drainage lines. 
•Sparse ground cover caused by land clearing, 
over-grazing, repeated cultivation, feral 
animals or drought.
•Concentrated runoff from steep ground 
flowing into cleared drainage depressions.

Stream Bank Erosion
•It is the wearing away of the banks of a 
stream or river. 
•This is distinguished from changes on the bed 
of the watercourse, which is referred to as 
scour. 
•Stream bank erosion damages the adjoining 
agricultural lands, highways and bridges.

Landslide
•The movement of a mass of rock, debris, or earth down a slope. 
•Sometimes referred to as mudflows or mudslides. 

SOIL FORMATION
ROCKS                                              WEATHERING                                         SOIL

WEATHERING 
Weathering is the breaking down of rocks into smaller particles known 
as soil. 
Weathering
➢Physical weathering
➢Chemical weathering
➢Biological weathering
➢Soil particles
➢Plant nutrients
➢Colour
➢Profile

SOIL AND ITS 
COMPOSITION

COMPOSITION OF A TYPICAL SOIL
Mineral phase (45%)
Composed of rocks and minerals. Products of weathering–
sand(large), silt(medium), clay(tiny), gravel, or stones.
Organic Matter (OM) phase (5%)
Composed of plants or animal materials (living or dead)
Pore spaces: (50%) – Macropoles and Micropoles 
Liquid phase (25%)
Part of the pore space occupied by water - medium in which 
mineral nutrients (e.g. Na
+
, K
+
 )are dissolved.
Air phase (25%)
Part of the pore space occupied by air (O
2
, CO
2
, N2)
Mineral 
phase
45%
Organic 
matter 
phase
5%
Water phase
25%
Air phase
25%

Mineral particles

Types of minerals
Silicate (igneous/ primary)
Formed from the precipitation of two major gases, basically 
oxygen and silicon
i.(SiO
4
)
n
 formed when the silicon tetrahedral are joined 
each other by the oxygen e.g. quartz (sand)
ii.Nesosilicate - Formed when tetrahedral are joined by 
metallic ions such as Fe and Mg E.g. olivine 
iii.Sorosilicate - Formed when silicon tetrahedral join each 
other by oxygen in straight pairs. e.g. melilite
iv.       Cyclosilicate - Formed when silicon tetrahedral join 
each other by the oxygen in rings e.g. emerald

v.Inosilicate - Formed by the combination of 
tetrahedral into: Single chains e.g. pyroxene: 
Double chains e.g. amphibole
vi.Phyllosilicate - Formed when the tetrahedral 
are combined in a sheet form muscovite and 
Biotite.
vii.Tectosilicate - Formed when Al replaces Si in 
the tetrahedron through isomorphous 
substitution E.g. orthoclase and plagioclase

Non-silicate (secondary)
Minerals formed after the primary minerals have broken down
i. Carbonate- Ca combining with other minerals E.g. calcite (CaCO
3
), dolomite(CaMgCO
3
)
ii. Oxides Minerals with oxide in it E.g. haematite (Fe
2
O
3
),  magnetite (FeO
4
) 
iii. Hydroxides - Set of minerals with hydroxide in it e.g. gibbisite Al(OH)
3
iv. Sulphates - Minerals containing sulphur e.g.: gypsum (CaSO
4
.H2O) 
v. Phosphate e.g. apatite
vii Clay minerals e.g. montmorillonite, kaolinite, illite

Soil water
Soil acts as a sponge to take up and retain water. Movement of water into soil 
is called infiltration, and the downward movement of water within the soil is 
called percolation.
IMPORTANCE
➢Vital in soil formation
➢A solvent of all nutrients 
➢Temperature control (soil and atmosphere) 
➢Biological activities (plants and animals)

SOIL WATER STATUS
Saturation – If pores are full of water and there is no air in the soil
Field Capacity – The amount of water that is remaining in the soil after drainage.
Permanent Wilting Point – When water is drawn from the soil by the plant roots so that even 
the smallest pores are empty, a point is reached when the remaining water is held tightly by 
adsorption and capillary that the roots cannot extract water at a sufficient rate. 
Available Water Capacity
This is the water range btwn FC and PWP. Availability depend on soil particles (clay sand silt).
Total Available Water (TAW) = D x AWC
   Where D  = depth of roots (m)
   AWC      = Available Water Capacity of the soil (mm/m) 
                                                 

Water holding properties of different soils
Texture class PWP (%)  FC (%)      Saturation (%)        AWC (mm/m)
Clay  29.8   41.6  48.2   118
Loam  12.8   25.1  46.4   123
Sand  5.0   11.2  43.0   62

Soil Air 
▪25 – 60% of soil is pore space
▪Soil air occupies volume of pore space which is not occupied by water
▪All biological activities need oxygen and produce carbondioxide
   N  O2  CO2
Atmosphere  79  20.9  0.03 
Soil air   79 – 80  18 – 19 0 .15 – 2.0
O2 is due to photosynthesis. O2 will diffuse into the soil
CO2 is due to microbial respiration. CO2 will diffuse into the atmosphere

IMPORTANCE OF SOIL AIR
1.plant roots need oxygen for respiration  and that process enables 
plant roots to absorb nutrients
2.microbial activities need oxygen
•when oxygen is cut off, anaerobic activities take place in soil that 
end up in production of toxic substances.
Examples:
❑CO
2
 + H
2
O → CH
4
❑H
2
S  is formed instead of SO
2
❑NO
2
 is formed instead of NO
3
❑Denitrification takes place
❑Reduction takes place i.e. Fe is changed from Fe
3+
 to Fe
2+

Soil organic matter

FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE SOIL TYPE 

1. Parent material
This is the material from which the soil comes from.  It influences both the 
physical and chemical properties of the soil. 
Most of the mineral matter comes from weathered bedrock or from other 
inorganic materials such as peat, in bogs and marshes. 
2. Climate
Climate influences rate and type of soil formation. Climate has two major 
components; moisture (precipitation) and temperature. 
•When precipitation exceeds evaporation, leaching of the soil will occur. 
•Temperature determines the rate of reactions; chemical and biological 
activity that influence on weathering.

3. Relief/Topography:
Relief influences > thickness of the soil profile >run-off > percolation and 
deposition > aspect and microclimate. 
4. Biota/Living organisms: 
Plants, animals and other organisms help create and enrich soil. The excrement 
(waste)/dead animals adds nutrients and matter to the soil. 
5. Time: 
Over time soils acquire different features resulting from the addition of organic 
matter and the activity of organisms. 

COURSE OUTLINE
INTRODUCTION
PRINCIPLES OF SOIL CONSERVATION
INTEGRATED APPROACHES TO SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION
ROCKS
SOIL GENESIS (ORIGIN OF SOIL)
SOIL AND ITS COMPOSITION

FEEDBACK?