

INTRODUCTION TO GENDER
Genderisasocialconstructthatdenotesculturallyandsocially
determineddifferencesbetweenfemalesandmales.Meaningthat
genderdoesnotexistnaturally,butisinsteadisinsteadaconceptthatis
createdbyculturalandsocietalnorms.
Conceptionofgenderstartsasearlyas3yearsofage,throughthe
influencesofcultureininformaleducationandformaleducation
a.Informaleducation;familyandsocietytraditions,beliefs,customs
andtaboos.
b.Formaleducation;curriculumbased,teachers,socialmodels
1

DIFFERENCE BETWEEN GENDER 
AND SEX
Gender refers to widely shared expectations and norms within a society 
about male and female behaviour , characteristics and roles. In other 
ways it is a social and cultural construct that differentiates females from 
males and defines the ways in which females and males interact with 
each other. Gender can change with time and it varies among different 
people, it can be learnt and is not permanent.
Sex refers to biological(anatomy and physiology) differences between 
males and females which are universal, unchanging, obvious and 
generally permanent. 
2

GENDER ROLES
Gender roles refer to learned behaviours in a given society conditioning 
which activities are considered feminine and masculine( Which roles 
should be played by females and which by males as assumed by 
society). And these are not necessarily determined  by biological factors. 
Thus gender roles are;
a.Reflected in the different activities, attitudes and behaviours of 
women, men, boys and girls.
b.Shaped by society; influenced by religion, economy, cultural norms 
and values and the pollical system.
c.Learnt through socialization
3

GENDER ROLES........................
d. Vary from one culture to another.
e. Vary within each society according to age, social class, ethnic or 
religious affiliation
f. Are dynamic and change over time.
g. Can be influenced and altered to a certain degree by individuals.
4

SEX ROLES
Sex roles refer to roles played by females and males with respect to their 
biological characteristics.
Se roles are few, universal and unchangeable. For example men make 
women pregnant while women lactate and breast feed. While men 
produce sperm, women conceive.
5

SOCIAL CONSTRUCTION OF GENDER
Social construction of gender is the systematic process an institutions which 
the society use to ascribe or attribute roles, responsibilities an expectations 
to males an females within the cultural context. Meaning it is a process 
through which the community wisdom, philosophies, customs an skills are 
learnt, accepted and customized. It is a process of learning what the society 
defines as good and bad an these are passed from one generation to the 
other. 
Through the process of socialization, gender roles, attributes and activities 
are deliberately and systematically cultivated in females and males overtime 
through cultural processes embedded in the social units around which 
society is organized.
We need to understand these units of socialization because they play a great 
role towards gender desparities.                                                                                                                            
6

UNITS OF SOCIALIZATION
i.The family( home)
ii.The school/education
iii.Religion
iv.Folk role
The out come of socialization, is stereotyping- stereotyping is to assign 
identical characteristics to a group of people regardless of their  
individual variations.
7

EVIDENCE OF INEQUALITIES
More than half of  Malawi’s population is composed of women and they 
must have equal opportunities to participate in public decision-making.
In order to develop good governance for  sustainable human 
development, women must be involved in all decision making from the 
family to National politics
Representation without empowerment is not enough. Inequality in 
power sharing leads to unequal sharing of resources.
8

WHAT IS DEVELOPMENT?
The process that involves the removal of social economic constraints to 
mobility, , access to resources and opportunities and an emergency of a 
more just society where males and females influence the direction of 
change through their active participation in decision making , 
contributing to the desired chares and sharing benefits base on 
individual contribution.
The challenge of development is to address the factors of 
impoverishment and to transform them in a way which people (men, 
women, boys and girls) become aware of their own situation and are 
empowered to act.                                                                                                                             
9

SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY AND 
CICUMSTANCES WHERE INEQUALITY IS 
EVIDENT 
1.EDUCATION: Girls drop out rate  is higher than that of  boys. 
More boys finish primary school girls  - girls drop out due to 
pregnancy and early marriages.
2.AGRICULTURE:                                                                                                                             
More than 70% of women are full time farmers as compared to 46% 
of men. Additionally most of agriculture wok is done by women.
3.EMPLOYMENT: More men are employed in the formal 
sector(only 10% of women in formal sector- compare to 45% of 
males. More managerial positions are occupied by males.
4.HEALTH: AIDS is a leading cause of death for age  group 15 – 49. 
In this age category AIDS is more prevalent  in females than males. 
This is explained by early sexuality and the sugar daddy syndrome. 
But also the vulnerability of females in general.
                                                                                                                             
10

GENDER INEQUALITY EVIDENCE 
.........................
5. DECISION MAKING: Most women do not take part in decision making 
at household level or at community.  
Women sometimes don’t even decide on their reproductive health. Women 
have less say on productive, reproductive and social roles they are expected to 
perform.
6. LIMITED ACCESS TO PRODUCTIVE ASSETS & SOCIAL  
SERVICES:  Within the context of Malawian patrilineal and matrilineal 
system of marriage women are equally denied access to and control of land 
property. This against the statutory law which provides for women’s 
ownership of property  in their own right. However tradition overtakes this. 
Women also have limited access to extension services, training, credit and 
labour saving technologies and off farm employment opportunities.
11

SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY & 
CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE INEQUALITY 
IS EVIDENT 
7. HEAVY WORK LOADS: Women are involved in multiplicity of activities from 
morning to evening. They take part in productive, reproductive and community 
services. They are overburdened with work and this has a negative impact on their 
health. Worse still most of the work done by women is not given the value it 
deserves.
9. DEPENDENCY BURDEN: Women have a heavy dependency burden 
characterized by life that begins with early marriage(average age at marriage is 18 
years) Under nutrition and unsafe child bearing age taken together are largely 
responsible for low life expectancy at birth and high maternal morbidity and 
mortality rates. Adolescent pregnancies have been on the increase with available 
data showing that the highest number of deaths occur among the 15 -24 years old 
group of women. The median age of marriage for both men and women is 18 and 24 
years respectively. By age 20, three quarters of women are married  where as fewer 
than  one in five men are married at this age. Nearly all women are married by age 
25.                                                                                
12

SECTORS OF THE ECONOMY & 
CIRCUMSTANCES WHERE INEQUALITY 
IS EVIDENT 
9. POLITICS: Fewer women are involved in active politics as 
compared to men. Few Cabinet ministers and MPs as compared to men. 
Why????
13

WHY IS GENDER A DEVELOPMENTAL 
ISSUE?
The gender approach is based on the fact that men and women are affected 
differently by development process because they play different roles and 
therefore have different needs and priorities. The purpose of gender is to 
provide both men and women with opportunities to access resources and 
services proportional to the importance of to them and their livelihood.(a 
means of supporting one's existence, especially financially or vocationally 
or the way one earns a living like through farming, business or 
employment)
SYNERGY: The work output of two people working together is more than 
the outputs of two people added together.
Incorporating gender considerations into development planning is a more 
cost- effective use of human, financial and other resources which will lead to 
increased productivity and sustainable development of Malawi. 
14

Why is Gender a developmental 
issue?.........
Sustainable development can only be achieved if disparities or inequalities in 
division of labour, and roles, access to and control over   resources and 
benefits are properly addressed for men, women, boys and girls.
Gender equality is an issue of  basic human rights; this is affirmed in a 
number of international and regional human rights instruments such as the 
human rights charter, AU and SADC. 
Gender equality is also a requirement of good governance in a democratic  
practice. Since men, women , boys and girls are prime agents of 
development therefore the fruits of development MUST be shared equally.
Thus if both men and women have better access and control over resources 
and income , productivity increases.
15

IMPLICATION OF GENDER ON 
AGRICULTURAL DEVELOPMENT
In Malawi both many and women participate in agricultural production 
and undertake different roles. Literature however indicates that about 
70% of full time farmers are women and they perform 50-70% of all 
farming activities. The women also produce about 60% of the food in 
the country and are thus responsible for household food security. While 
men are pre-occupied with non- farm activities such as trading, wage 
employment and other off farm income earning activities. It must be 
known that they are not available for full time farming. And in 
households headed by women, all activities and farming decisions are 
done by women.
16

IMPLICATION OF GENDER IN 
AGRICULTURE......
Gender is an issue in agriculture because there exists gender disparities 
or barriers which have implications on the productivity of men and 
women farmers and this need to be reduced as they hinder sustainable 
agriculture development.
There are many constraints that impinge on women’s and men’ roles in 
agriculture. These include: 
17

CONSTRAINTS THAT IMPINGE WOMEN 
AND MEN’S ROLE IN  AGRICULTURE
i.UNEQUAL ACCESS TO LAND: Land is the most important resource 
in agriculture and yet many poor people including women have little 
access to it. Legally by Malawian laws men and women are not 
discriminated against land ownership, however traditional practices on 
land allocation favours one sex( In patrilineal- rights of land are passed to 
males; from father to son thus females are disadvantaged) in this culture 
daughters are disadvantaged  - when they leave the their village to get 
married they can access their husbands land but cannot control it and 
when husband dies the land is inherited by the son. And in matrilineal 
system the ownership of land is passed from mother to daughter and male 
child is disadvantaged  he can only access wife’s land but the control lies 
in the hands of uncles and nephews. With this inequality to land 
ownership has implications in he sense that there is no investment on the 
land.  
18

CONSTRAINTS THAT IMPINGE WOMEN 
AND MEN’S ROLE IN  AGRICULTURE
ii.UNEQUAL OR LIMITED ACCESS TO CREDIT- Women fail 
to access credit because of gender stereotyping of saying that men 
are household heads and  are often seen as farmers while women 
merely contribute labour. Also issues of security and collateral 
women are limited in accessing the loans. In a situation where 
women have had opportunity to access credit for crop production, 
the decision to use the inputs and control still lies in a man. In some 
instances women can not access the granary (nkhokwe) or food 
store without the consent of the husband.  
      The purpose of gender is to provide both men and women with 
opportunities and services proportional to the importance of the activity 
to them and their livelihood.
19

CONSTRAINTS THAT IMPINGE WOMEN 
AND MEN’S ROLE IN  AGRICULTURE
iii. UNEQUAL ACCESS TO EDUCATION , EXTENSION AND 
TRAINING: Preference to boy’s education has meant that majority of 
women are illiterate. 
Education is  a human right and an essential ingredient or tool for achieving 
the goal of equality and equity. High illiteracy has a bearing on the access and 
control over resources of production and the ability of women to understand 
technical information. 
In order to produce efficiently, both male and female farmers need 
appropriate skills and knowledge. However, the workload of women hinders 
them from attending extension meetings and training. This is much worse 
where planning of such events does not take into consideration the heavy 
workload of women thus adjust time and venue.
20

CONSTRAINTS THAT IMPINGE WOMEN 
AND MEN’S ROLE IN  AGRICULTURE
iv. STATISTICAL INVISIBILITY: Although women play a big role 
in agriculture, there role is still invisible to planners. Existing 
information and data is not disaggregated. This has a bearing on 
targeting of interventions because the situation, needs and priorities of 
women are not felt, acknowledged and taken into account in project or 
programme planning.
v. TIME CONSTRAINT: Women face greater time constraint than 
men. They work longer hours on both productive and reproductive 
work. This is due to great gender based division of labour with women 
doing all the reproductive work in order to maintain the livelihood of 
the household.
21

CONSTRAINTS THAT IMPINGE WOMEN AND 
MEN’S ROLE IN  AGRICULTURE
vi. PREFERENCE FOR CASH CROPS: There has been a neglect of 
the traditional crops that women grow and manage because they are 
considered of little economic value yet they contribute to achieving 
household food security. Preference is for cash crops which are 
controlled by men hence more good land is put under cash crops than 
food crops. Food security then suffers on this basis.
vii. ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY: Some technologies are biased 
towards men than women because of difficulties to access or cultural 
restrictions on use. Additionally there are low research priorities on 
technologies appropriate for women’s crops. Generally, developed 
technologies by research do not reflect gender needs of men and 
women.  
22

CONSTRAINTS THAT IMPINGE WOMEN 
AND MEN’S ROLE IN  AGRICULTURE
RESTRICTION OF MEMBERSHIP IN GROUPS: Normally  group 
formation criteria does not specify gender needs and levels of female 
empowerment. In most cases, more men join mixed groups than women.  
For example in irrigation where membership to the water users 
association is based on land holding size as criteria, such groups tend to 
be dominated by men.
23

LINKAGES BETWEEN GENDER AND 
HIV & AIDS
These linkages are really on a gender based focus i.e how different 
social expectations, roles, status and economic power of men, women, 
boys and girls affect and are affected by HIV and AIDS epidemic.
There is a social dimension of HIV and AIDS since the disease is  
embedded in a setting of social and cultural values, norms and concepts.  
These social and cultural norms influence not only how communities 
and individuals perceive the disease, but also on how it affects its spread 
and its possible strategies for prevention.  Therefore certain patterns of 
our culture have to be taken into consideration for a broad 
understanding of this linkage.
24

LINKAGES BETWEEN GENDER AND 
HIV & AIDS
i.GENDER AND POWER RELATIONS
The power relations between men and women together with the 
physiological  differences determine to a great extent women’s and 
men’s risk of HIV infection. For example;
a.In many cultures or society men are dominant hence control women 
in all aspects of relationships while women comply. Women learn 
that their first loyalty is to reinforce rather than challenge female 
subordination. They fail to refuse to have sex even though they 
know their husbands is having extra marital affairs.
b.Polygamy is also an expression of paternal and sexual power as well 
as a system of control.
25

LINKAGES BETWEEN GENDER AND 
HIV & AIDS
GENDER AND POWER RELATIONS ...........
c. Wife inheritance: Power relations here makes a woman get inherited 
just like property.
d. The low social status and economic dependence of women and girls 
make them very vulnerable and are at  risk to contracting HIV. Their 
subordinate position in relation to men, restrict their possibilities of 
taking control of their lives as a result they barter sex for survival. Most 
women claim that they go into extra- marital sexual relationships/ or 
commercial sex because of poverty                                                                                   
26

LINKAGES BETWEEN GENDER AND 
HIV & AIDS
ii. GENDER AND PARENTHOOD 
In most societies, women’s primary role is bear and nurture children while 
men’s main duty is seen to be earning a living( bread winner) and dealing 
with broader issues. This has  implications on HIV infection; this role is 
extended to women nursing the sick, taking care of the elderly, orphans. Thus 
women are psychologically  and physically burdened, as care givers if no 
proper care taken, can be infected.
In some cases they can indulge in commercial sex in order to get money to 
support the care issues 
Childless women in most societies often have a low status so women may 
indulge in unprotected sex with a variety of partners so as to secure a baby 
thereby increasing the risk of HIV esposure.                                                  
27

LINKAGES BETWEEN GENDER AND 
HIV & AIDS
iii. GENDER AND SEXUALITY: It’s a common belief among 
Malawians that women seduce men into having sex with them or raping 
them because it is believed that male sexual needs are so strong that 
men cannot resist. E.g a girl is raped because she wore a mini skirt or 
dress and it aroused a man. These notions make men appear to be 
governed by their instinct unable to control their behaviour and are 
victims of female power. As a result men are not expected to behave 
responsibly while women sexuality and behaviour are controlled . If not 
controlled society use bad/ negative words to describe the behaviour of 
women.( hule for woman and Mamuna ndi mwana for man. Thus 
society pressure makes it difficult for men to change their behaviour. 
These behaviour form an obstacle to HIV prevention
28

LINKAGES BETWEEN GENDER AND 
HIV & AIDS
•GENDER AND SEXUALITY..........
Some sexual practices are risky factors in as far as HIV and AIDs is 
concerned Dry sex preference by men.
Harmful cultural practices- fisi chokolo, Widow cleansing , polygamy  
initiation rites for girls and boys
  
29

SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
Sustainable development isa way of living that meets the needs of the 
present while also ensuring that future generations can meet their own 
needs.
It's based on the idea that we should balance the needs of the economy, 
society, and the environment, and that policies in these areas should 
work together.
30