

The following 10 questions are designed to help identify your achievement drive. Select the 
letter that best matches your answer and write it down. Scoring information is provided below. 
1. An instructor in one of your classes has asked you to vote on three grading options. Which of 
these options would you choose? 
a. Study the course material, take the exams and receive the grade I earn 
b. Roll a die and get an A if I roll an odd number and a D if I roll an even number 
c. Show up for all class lectures, turn in a short essay and get a C 
2. How would you describe yourself as a risk taker? 
a. High 
b. Moderate 
c. Low 
3. You have just been asked by your boss to take on a new project in addition to the many tasks 
you are already doing. What would you tell your boss? 
a. ’Since I’m already snowed under, I can’t handle any more.’ 
b. ’Sure, I’m happy to help out; give it to me.’ 
c. ’Let me look over my current workload and get back to you tomorrow about whether I 
can take on any more work.’ 
4. Which one of these people would you most like to be? 
a. Steve Jobs, founder of Apple Computers 
b. Elon Musk, of PayPal, SpaceX, Tesla, SolarCity, Hyperloop, and Neuralink fame 
c. Richard Branson, Virgin Airlines 
5. Which one of these games would you most like to play? 
a. Monopoly/Hotel Tycoon 
b. Bingo/Lotto 
c. Roulette/betting 
6. You have decided to become more physically active. Which one of these approaches has the 
greatest attraction for you? 
a. Join a neighbourhood sports team 
b. Work out on my own 
c. Join a local health club 
7. With which one of these groups would you most enjoy playing poker/card games? 
a. Friends 
b. High-stakes players 
c. Individuals who can challenge me 
8. Which one of these people would you most like to be? 
a. A detective solving a crime 
b. A politician giving a victory statement 
c. A millionaire sailing on their yacht 
9. Which one of these activities would you prefer to do on an evening off? 
a. Visit a friend 
b. Work on a hobby 
c. Watch television 
10. Which one of these occupations has the greatest career appeal for you? 
a. Computer salesperson 
b. Corporate accountant 
c. Criminal lawyer 

Read each of the following 10 statements and indicate your agreement or disagreement. If you fully 
agree with the statement, score 10. If you totally disagree, score 1. If you tend to agree more than 
you disagree, give a response between 6 and 9 depending on how much you agree. If you tend to 
disagree, give a response between 2 and 5. 
1. Successful entrepreneurs are often methodical and analytical individuals who carefully plan 
out what they are going to do and then do it. 
2. The most successful entrepreneurs are born with special characteristics, such as a high 
achievement drive and a winning personality, and these traits serve them well in their 
entrepreneurial endeavours. 
3. Many of the characteristics needed for successful entrepreneurship can be learned through 
study and experience. 
4. The most successful entrepreneurs are those who invent a unique product or service. 
5. Highly successful entrepreneurs tend to have very little formal schooling. 
6. Most successful entrepreneurs admit that dropping out of school was the best thing they 
ever did. 
7. Because they are unique and individualistic in their approach to business, most successful 
entrepreneurs find it 
hard to socialise with others; they just do not fit in. 
8. Research shows that although it is important to have adequate financing before beginning 
an entrepreneurial 
venture, it is often more important to have managerial competence and proper planning. 
9. Successful entrepreneurship is more a matter of preparation and desire than luck. 
10. Most successful entrepreneurs do well in their first venture, which encourages them to 
continue; failures tend 
to come later on as the enterprise grows. 
 
Put your answers in the table below in this way: 
• enter your answers to numbers 1, 3, 8 and 9 just as they appear 
• subtract your answers to 2, 4, 5, 6, 7 and 10 from 11 and enter the results. 
• For example, if you gave an answer of 8 to number 1, enter an 8 in the box marked 1. If you 
gave an answer of 
7 to number 2, enter a 4 (11 – 7) in the box marked 2. 
• Finally, add the scores in both columns and enter your total in the space provided. 
 
Scoring block 
Q# AS THEY APPEAR Q# SUBTRACT FROM 11 
1  2  
2  4  
8  6  
9  7  
  5  
  10  
 TOTAL SCORE   
Myths of Entrepreneurship 
 