

_____________ 
___________
___________
The Quick Emotional Intelligence Self-Assessment*
*Adapted from a model by Paul Mohapel (paul.mohapel@shaw.ca)
Emotional intelligence (referred to asEQ) is your ability tobe aware of, understand and manage your emotions. 
Why is EQ important?While intelligence (referred to asIQ) is important, success in life depends more on EQ.  Take
the assessment below to learn your EQ strengths!
Rank each statement as follows:   0(Never)  1(Rarely)  2(Sometimes)  3(Often)4(Always)
Emotional Awareness–Total:
STATEMENTSCORE
Myfeelings are clear to me at any given moment 
Emotions play an important part in my life 
My moods impact the people around me 
I find it easy to put words to my feelings 
My moods are easily affected by external events 
I can easily sense when I’m going to be angry 
I readily tell others my true feelings 
I find it easy to describe my feelings 
Even when I’m upset, I’m aware of what’s happening to me 
I am able to stand apart from my thoughts and feelings and examine them 
Emotional Management –Total:
STATEMENTSCORE
I accept responsibility for my reactions 
I find it easy to make goals and stick with them 
I am an emotionally balanced person 
I am a very patient person 
I can accept critical comments from others without becoming angry 
I maintain my composure, even during stressful times 
If an issue does not affect me directly, I don’t let it bother me 
I can restrain myself when I feel anger towards someone 
I control urges to overindulge in things that could damage my well being 
I direct my energy into creative work or hobbies 
Social Emotional Awareness–Total:
STATEMENTSCORE
I consider the impact of my decisions on other people 
I can tell easily if the people around me are becoming annoyed 
I sense it when a person’s mood changes 
I am able to be supportive when giving bad news to others 
I am generally able to understand the way other people feel 
My friends can tell me intimate things about themselves 
It genuinely bothers me to see other people suffer 
I usually know when to speak and when to be silent 
I care what happens to other people 
I understand when people’s plans change 

___________ Relationship Management–Total:
STATEMENTSCORE
I am able to show affection 
My relationships are safe places for me 
I find it easy to share my deep feelings with others 
I am good at motivating others 
I am a fairly cheerful person 
It is easy for me to make friends 
People tell me I am sociable and fun 
I like helping people 
Others can depend on me 
I am able to talk someone down if they are very upset 
My EQ Strengths!
DomainScore
Emotional Awareness 
Emotional Management 
Social Emotional Awareness 
Relationship Management 
  
Measure your own effectiveness in each domain by using the following key:
0 –24Area for Enrichment: Requires attention and development
25 –34Effective Functioning: Consider strengthening
35 –40Enhanced Skills: Use a leverage to develop weaknesses

To help you develop your EQ skills, use the following information.
Self-awareness—the ability to recognize your
emotions and their impact.
Can youwalk into a room, meet a stranger and
quickly sense that something is not as it 
seems? Formerly knownas “intuition,” this
instinctual knowledge is based on emotional
intelligence. 
Self-management — the ability to control your 
emotions and behavior and adapt to changing 
circumstances.  
Can you adequately harness your anger, 
disappointment or fear so your emotions don’t 
interfere with your ability to listen or problem 
solve? Do you know when you need help, and 
can you ask for it?  
Social awareness — the ability to sense, 
understand, and react to the emotions of 
others and to feel comfortable socially.  
Can you tell when you are unintentionally 
making another person uncomfortable or when 
someone who is smiling is really upset?  
Relationship management — the ability to 
inspire, influence, and connect to others and to 
manage conflict.  
Can you remain calm, energized and focused in 
the face of another’s distress or during an 
upsetting situation? Can you defuse conflict?  
1. Self-Awareness–Knowing your internal, cognitive state, preferences, resources and
intuitions. 
Understand negative thought processes/emotional triggers
Recognize relationship between thoughts, feelings, and actions 
Learn to interrupt negative thinking 
The power of Proactivity
APPLICATION
How are your strengths and weaknesses in the area of self-awareness impacting your personal and 
professional roles? How would one or more of these situations improve if you were to become 
more self-aware? 
List one way you can improve your self-awareness:

2. Self-Management–managing your internal emotional/cognitive states, impulses and
resources to obtain goals.
Identify limiting beliefs
Use goal setting and follow up to demonstrate power to change destiny
Begin with the end in mind/consider possibilities
Change leader
Self-regulation
APPLICATION
How are your strengths and weaknesses in the area of self-management impacting your personal 
and professional roles? How would one or more of these situations improve if you were to become 
more self-aware?  
List one way you can improve your self-management:  
3. Social Awareness -the ability to sense, understand, and react to others' emotions while
comprehending social networks.
Understanding others/empathy 
Paying attention to body language cues
Effective communication skills
Recognizing communication blockers
Practicing active listening 
APPLICATION
How are your strengths and weaknesses in the area of social awareness impacting your personal 
and professional roles? How would one or more of these situations improve if you were to become 
more self-aware?  
List one way you can improve your social awareness: 

4. Social Skills -the ability to inspire, influence and develop others while managing conflict.
Learn to be a leader
Learn to be a follower
Value contributions of all participants
Follow through on commitments
Understand conflict 
Seek consensus
The art of listening effectively
APPLICATION
How are your strengths and weaknesses in the area of social skills impacting your personal and 
professional roles? How would one or more of these situations improve if you were to become 
more self-aware?  
List one way you can improve your social skills: 
PERSONAL PLAN OF ACTION REGARDING EMOTIONAL INTELLIGENCE: 
How does this information shape the way you will interact with others?
How can you use this information to be better at your job?
How can you teach others about EI?