

Haloalkanes
Dr FatemaJagot

•A haloalkane, commonly known as an alkyl halide, is a compound that 
contains a halogen atom covalently bonded to an sp
3
hybridised 
carbon atom.
•Given the symbol RX, where X can be F, Cl, Br, or I.
Haloalkanes

IUPAC NAMES
•Locate and name the parent chain containing the largest number of 
carbon atoms.
•Number the parent chain from the direction that gives the 
substituent encountered first the lowest number.
•Show halogen substituents by the prefixes fluoro-, chloro-, iodo-, and 
bromo-, and list them in alphabetical order along with other 
substituents. 

For halo-alkyl 
substituents, the 
carbon bonded to 
the parent chain is 
numbered as carbon 
1. Use a number to 
indicate position of 
halogen

•In haloalkenes, the location of the double bond determines the 
numbering of the parent hydrocarbon. In molecules containing 
functional groups designated by a suffix (for example, ol, ene, oic
acid), the location of the functional group indicated by the suffix 
determines the numbering.

Practice exercise 1: Draw the condensed structural formulae of the 
following compounds:
3-iodo-2-methylpentane
cis-1-chloro-3-(chloromethyl)cyclohexane

Classification of Haloalkanes
•Alkyl halides are classified according to the nature of the carbon atom 
which is bonded to the halogen.
•If the carbon is bonded to oneother carbon atom, it is a primary(1°) 
alkyl halide.
•If the carbon is bonded to two other carbon atoms, it is a secondary 
(2°) alkyl halide, and if the halogen-bearing carbon is bonded to three 
other carbons, it is a tertiary(3°) alkyl halide. 
Where Ris any carbon-
containing group.

Practice exercise 2: For each of the following compounds, give the 
IUPAC name and classify the compound as a methyl, primary, 
secondary, or tertiary alkyl halide.

Uses of Haloalkanes
•Solvents –alkyl halides are commonly used in industrial and 
household solvents for example in cleaning agents, paint removers.
•Reagents –many alkyl halides are used as starting materials for the 
synthesis of many other complex substances.
•Anaesthetics –ethyl chloride is used a topical anaesthetic for minor 
procedures. The mixed alkyl halide CF
3
CHClBr, which goes by the 
common name Halothane is used as an anaesthetic in surgical 
procedures.
•Refrigerants –chlorofluorocarbons (also known as Freons) are 
fluorinated haloalkanescommonly used as refrigerant gas. Freon-22 
or CHClF
2
is used in refrigerators and automotive air-conditioners.



Structure of Haloalkanes
•In an alkyl halide, the halogen atom is bonded to an sp
3
carbon atom.
•The halogen is more electronegative than the carbon, thus the C—X  
bond is polarized.
•The electronegativitiesof the halogens increase in the order:
•The C—X bond lengths increase as the halogen atoms become larger.

Physical Properties of Haloalkanes
1) Boiling Points:
•There are two types of intermolecular forces that affect the boiling 
points of alkyl halides: dispersion forces (London forces) and dipole-
dipole forces.
•The larger the surface area of the molecule, the stronger the 
dispersion forces, the higher the boiling point.
•Surface areas increase with molecular weight.
•Surface areas decrease with increased branching of the molecule.

The heavier the halogen atoms 
are, the greater the surface 
area for interaction, and the 
higher the boiling point.
Thus the boiling points of ethyl 
halides increase in the order: 
F<Cl<Br<I

2) Densities
•Like their boiling points, their densities also follow predictable trends.
•Alkyl fluorides are less dense than water.
•Alkyl chlorides that contain one chlorine atom are also less dense 
than water.
•Alkyl chlorides that contain two or more chlorine atoms are more 
dense than water.
•Alkyl bromides and alkyl iodides are more dense than water.

Practice exercise 3: For each pair of compounds, indicate which 
compound is likely to have the higher boiling point, and explain why.
a)Isopropyl bromide (2-bromopropane) and n-butyl bromide 
(bromobutane)
b)Isopropyl chloride (2-chloropropane) and tert-butyl bromide (2-
bromo-2-methylpropane)
c)1-bromobutane and 1-chlorobutane

Reactions of Haloalkanes
•Alkyl halides can easily be converted to other functional groups.
•The halogen can leave, carrying with it both electrons from the C—X 
bond, leaving as a halide ion.
•We say that halides are good leaving groups.
•When another atom/ group of atoms replaces the halogen, the 
reaction is a substitution.

•In a nucleophilic substitution, a nucleophile replaces a leaving group 
from a carbon atom, using its lone pair of electrons to form a new 
bond with the carbon atom.
•When the halide ion leaves with another atom or ion, a new pibond 
forms, and the result is an elimination. In many eliminations, a 
molecule of H—X is lost from the alkyl halide to form an alkene 
(known as a dehydrohalogenation).
Most nucleophiles act 
as bases
Basic