

HORTICULTURAL CROPS PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 
 
Lecture 1 

INTRODUCTION TO HORTICULTURE 
“Horticulture”  
Origin: “hortus” in latin means “garden” 
“culture” means management or care.   
So basically horticulture is the growing and management of fruits, 
vegetable, ornamental plants and flowers.  
 
Definition: branch of agriculture that deals with the intensive 
cultivation of fruits, vegetables and flowers for food, recreation, 
improving the environment, medicinal and culinary purposes.  
In Malawi, horticulture embraces the growing of fruits, vegetables, 
spices, plantation-crops, root and tuber crops, flowers and other 
ornamental plants.  
All these crops are grown at varying levels to meet the market 
demand and consumption levels. 

SUB-CLASSES OF HORTICULTURE 
Olericulture.  This is the production, processing, storage and 
marketing of vegetable crops.  All the scientific principles that 
relate to vegetable production come under olericulture.   
 
Pomology.  This is the art and science of growing, processing and 
marketing of fruit crops.   
 
Floriculture: The science an art of growing, management and 
marketing of flowers. 
 
Ornamental horticulture (sometimes classed together as 
floriculture):  This is the art and science of growing and 
management of ornamental plants.  Ornamental plants are plants 
that have decorative effects.  They are not flowers.  Some pine 
trees, ornamental cassava, cactus etc. It also includes floriculture, 
landscaping and production nurseries. 
 

Importance of Horticulture 
Source of food 
Source of income 
Employment generation. 
Development of Agro-industries  
 

Potential for horticultural crops 
The country’s potential for horticultural crops comes from 
the many variables and these are listed. 
There is high diversity of horticultural crops with 
different uses (fruits, spices, flowers, vegetables, 
ornamentals).  So they play an important role in the lives 
of people (compare these with maize, wheat, sorghum). 
Quantity of product used per unit time.  How many 
Malawian use tomatoes, strawberry, mushroom, cabbage, 
rape, beans?). 
Value per unit land area.  Four tomatoes will sell at K50 
and for 100 to 160 tomatoes one can buy a bag of maize. 
Value per unit land area and time.  More money is made 
per unit land area of onions, cabbage, carrot than that 
made from maize, wheat and rice. 
 

Potential for horticultural crops 
Horticultural crops are universally used or consumed.  For 
example almost all Malawians consume tomatoes, onions, 
leafy vegetables and beans.  If we consider 13.1 million 
people and everyone eating a tomato, there is a lot of 
quantity and money exchanging hands in the trade. 
Rural employment. Many people are self-employed through 
production and marketing of horticultural crops.  There are 
many vegetable traders that carry tomato, cabbages, onions, 
etc. to different market places, thereby generating incomes 
from the trade. 
The economic importance of horticultural crops also arises 
from nutritional value of the crops.  This refers to fruits, 
vegetables and spices.  Fruits and vegetables provide 
vitamins, minerals, carbohydrates, and proteins 
 

End 
 

VEGETABLE PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
Lecture 2 

Introduction 
Vegetables can best be defined as plants whose 
edible parts are high in water content. 
Such edible parts include roots, stems, leaves, 
immature and mature fruits of flower parts. 
The art and science of producing vegetables is 
referred to as olericulture 
A vegetable could thus be defined as an edible,  
usually a succulent plant or a portion of it eaten with 
staples as main course or as supplementary food in 
cooked or raw form 
 

Classification of Vegetables 
Part of plant eaten 
Leafy and stem vegetables- this include cabbage, asparagus 
etc. 
 
Fruit vegetables- tomatoes, eggplants, peas, beans, okra etc. 
 
Underground vegetables (tuber or roots) – carrot, turnip, 
radish, potato, onion and parsnips etc. 
 
Flower vegetables- cauliflower and broccoli.  
 
 

Classification of Vegetables cont... 
Number of growing season(s) 
Annual vegetables- cabbage, mustard (when grown for 
food) etc. 
 
Biennial vegetables- carrot, onion (when grown for 
seed) 
 
Perennial vegetables- asparagus (can live up to 15 
years)  

Type of season  
Cool Season Vegetables 
–Favour the high land (plateau areas)  
–Two categories :  
–Temp range of 16
o
C – 18
o
C such as spinach, cabbage, 
broccoli, cauliflower, lettuce, carrot, peas etc.  
–Those adaptable to wide temperatures of about 18
o
C – 24
o
C 
e.g. onion, shallots, leek. garlic, asparagus etc.  
Warm season Vegetables  
–Two categories: 
–Those considered as low land vegetables (within 20
o
C – 
27
o
C) such as tomato, pepper, cucumber, squash, bean, 
pumpkin.  
–And there are those considered as long season crop (above 
27
o
C) e.g. water melon, sweet potatoes, eggplant, okra, hot-
pepper etc. 
 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

According to Plant Botany/Botanical classification 
Done based on the broader relationship of plants 
according to their morphological similarities such as 
flower type, root or stem system etc.  
The grouping is normally in the order of: Kingdom, 
Division, Sub-division, Phylum, Sub-phylum, Class, 
Sub-class, Order, Family, Genus and Species.  
However, the Family, genus and species are the most 
commonly used classification parameters as shown 
below: 
 
 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

Classification of Vegetables cont... 
Liliacea-(Lily Family) 
Onion- Allium cepa 
Garlic- Allium sativum 
Leek- Allium porrum 
Shallot- Allium calonicum 
Asparagus- Asparagus officinalis 
 
 

Cruciferae- (Mustard Family) 
Cabbage- Brassica oleracea var. capitata (headed type) 
Cauliflower- Brassica oleracea var. botrytis (non-headed) 
Kale- Brassica oleracea (B. carinata) var. acephala (Kamganje) 
Brocolli- Brassica italica 
Turnip- Brassica rapa 
Chinese cabbage- Brassica pekinensis 
Mustard- Brassica funcea 
Radish- Raphanus sativum. 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

Leguminosae – (Pea Family) 
Garden peas- Pisum sativum (Nsawawa) 
Broad bean- Vicia faba 
French bean- Phaseolus vulgaris 
Lima bean- Phaseolus lunatus 
 
Malvaceae- (Mallow Family) 
Okra or gumbo- Abelmoschus esculentus 
 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

Umbelliferae- (Parsley Family) 
Carrot- Daucus carota  
Parsley- Petroselinum crispum 
Celery- Apium graveolens 
Parsnip- Pastinaca sativa 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

Convolvulaceae- (Morning Glory Family) 
Sweet potato- Ipomea batatas 
 
Solanaceae- (Nightshade Family) 
Irish potato- Solanum tuberosum 
Eggplant- Solanum melongena 
Tomato- Lycoperscon esculentum 
Pepper- Capsicum frutescens 
 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

Cucurbitaceae- (Gourd family) 
Field Pumpkin- Cucurbita pepo 
Water melon- Citrullus vulgaris 
Cucumber- Cucumis sativus 
Squash- Cucurbita maxima 
 
Compositae- (Composite family) 
Lettuce- Lactuca sativa 
 
Classification of Vegetables cont... 

Vegetable production systems 
Vegetable production ventures can vary in farm size, amount of 
investment put in,  methods employed, and economic role. Vegetable 
production systems are either market- or home-oriented.  
Home (backyard)Gardening 
Production mainly for household use 
Low production since choice of land is limited to 
backyard area.  
Choice of crops to be grown often depends on; 
–Food and nutritional value of the crop 
–Farmer preference 
–Yield per unit area 

Vegetable production systems cont... 
Fresh Market Gardening 
Production close to disposable market.  
Common in the urban setting where farmers 
around produce vegetables for direct selling in the 
dwelling units. 
 
 

Distant/Truck gardening 
Production done at a distant place from the market.  
The aim is to achieve low production costs due to 
the following factors; 
Good and cheap reliable water sources 
Cheap labour and land 
Favourable climate and soil conditions 
Mechanization & technologies may be applied 
 
Vegetable production systems cont... 

Vegetable production systems cont... 
Processing gardening 
Production for the raw materials to be used in the 
food processing industry.  
Such processes include: 
–Canning 
–Freezing 
–Dehydrating/drying  
–Pickling  
–Other processed products e.g. juices, jams 

End 
 

Site selection for vegetable 
production 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 
Lecture 3 

Factors to be considered when 
choosing a site: 
Environmental factors 
Climate 
Water 
Soil type 
Topography 
Distance from the shade or bush 

Factors to be considered when 
choosing a site cont... 
Social economic factors 
•Accessible roads 
•Good security mechanism 
•Availability of market 

Raising vegetable seedlings 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 
Lecture 4 

Introduction 
Vegetable seedlings are normally raised on a nursery 
(small prepared land) then transplanted to the main 
field: 
Advantages: 
It is economical in the use of seed 
It ensures transplanting strong and healthy 
seedlings 
 
 

Seed Bed Construction 
Land preparation: plough 10-15cm deep, remove all 
debris and stones, break or pulverise the clods. 
Bed construction:  
Raised seedbeds are recommended for maximum drainage 
Seedbed size: 1-1.2m wide and 10-15cm high  
Water the bed before raking to soften the clods so that they 
are easily broken. 
Manure application: as basal dressing, phosphate and 
potash fertilizers plus sieved compost are helpful for 
healthy seedling development.  
Levelling: level the surface by raking for even spreading 
of the water, even germination and uniform size of the 
seedlings. 
 

Seed Bed Construction 
A well prepared seed bed 

Seed Boxes/Containers 
Movable seedbeds, convenient for use 
during rainy or cool season when seedlings 
may have to be raised in doors. 
Also used for other vegetables whose 
seedlings do not easily regenerate new 
roots 
 

Seed Boxes/Containers cont... 
Considerations when using seed boxes:  
•Structure of the seed box 
–Timber boxes with drainage holes at the bottom.  
–Two standing bars for easy lifting up the bottom from the ground 
for more drainage 
–They should not be too heavy to lift. Size: 50cm x 40cm x10cm.  
•Commercial plastic seed boxes: can be purchased 
•Planting media for seed boxes: use volume measures at the 
following ratio per box: 
 Soil:  Sand:  Compost+   Compound fertilizer  
 2:  1: 1:  + 5g  
 5: 2: 1:  + 5g 
•Sub-soil is necessary to be used in order to reduce cases of 
weeds and  other diseases. 
 

Seed Rates 
Helps to prepare enough seeds to avoid shortage or wastage 
of seedlings. 
The following calculation can be helpful: 
 
   Seed rate = WN ( 1  +  S)   
                                 G 
Where N = Number of plants required in the main field. E.g 
cabbage spaced at 60 by 50cm, Number of plants per hectare 
will be about 33, 300. 
W = Weight of seed to be sown in grams per 1000 seeds. E.g 
cabbage on average it is 3g/1000 seed. 
G = Germination percentage (%) or germination rate. 
Guaranteed the seed company or through own testing. A 
viable seed is >85% 
S = Spare seedlings as a percentage (%). Seed meant for 
supplying in the main field. 5% is  often advocated.  

 
Seed requirement for cabbage to be planted at a 
plot of One hectare of land will be: 
 
Seed rate = 3g/1000seeds x   33, 300  (1   +    5%) 
          85/100 
         = 0.003 x 33, 000 x 1.05    
                                         0.85 
  =123.4 g/hectare, approx 125 g/ ha. 
 
 
 

Sowing Vegetable Seeds 
Methods of Sowing 
Broadcasting:  
Scatter the seed over the bed surface followed by  raking the bed 
thoroughly or covering the bed with compost. 
Used for small seeded vegetables 
For even broadcasting, mix the seed with sand 
Advantage: it saves labour costs. 
Disadvantage: more seed will be required since not all land on the 
bed area. 
Drilling method:  
Sow in rows across the bed  (10-15cm between rows).  
Seedlings have enough space for adequate amount of light and air 
Depth of Sowing  
It depends on seed size 
The optimum depth: 2.5 times seed diameter (on average 0.5- 
1.5cm) 

Seed Germination Problems 
Germination problems could be as a result of: 
Quality Problems: 
Maturity of seed: sowing pre-mature seed of low 
viability. 
Expired seed: too old seeds that has lost viability. It is 
recommended to plant seed of within 1-2 years 

Seed Germination Problems cont... 
Management problems: 
Seedbed construction- rough seedbed 
Depth of sowing- sowing too deep or too shallow 
Moisture condition- too much wet or dry 
conditions on seedbed 
Pest and disease attack- soil-borne pests and 
diseases 
 

Seed Germination Problems cont... 
Seasonal Problems 
Poor temperature conditions: Cool season vegetables 
will have problems for their seeds to germinate in hot 
season and vice versa e.g lettuce vs cucumber.  
Physiological Problems 
Naturally low germination rate: e.g garlic, shallot, 
lettuce 
Natural (physiological) requirements for germination 
that demand special stimulation/treatment: 
oLight stimulation e.g. lettuce seeds 
oExposure to low temperatures e.g garlic (5
0
C for 30 days) 
 
 
 
 
 

Management of vegetable seedlings 
 

Amount 
Early stage (10 days after germination): keep 5 cm depth of seed 
bed always moist by frequent light watering. Water 2-3 times a 
day and mulch the bed to maintain the moisture. Too much water 
will cause suffocation due to poor aeration. 
Middle stage (3 wks after germination): deeper root system, Keep 
the seedlings and bed surface dry to avoid diseases. Water 
adequately in the morning at least once a day. Water again only if 
dry depth is below 5cm.  
Late stage: (2 wks before transplanting): Water depending on 
moisture condition of the bed. Seedling coverage acts as a natural 
mulch  
Watering Method 
Use a fine-rosed watering can  
Do not water the  seedlings when they are under hot hours in the 
mid-day because sudden change of temperature may kill the 
young seedlings. 
Watering 

Mulching 
The advantages: 
Conserves soil from erosion. 
Allows thorough penetration of water and air in the soil. 
Retains soil moisture during dry season. 
Prevents the growth of weeds. 
Protects the surface roots from hot temperatures. 
Adds organic matter to the soil once they have decomposed. 
The disadvantages: 
It does isolate the solar energy- especially in cool season 
when optimum soil temperature is needed for root 
development. 
Harbours some insect-pests more especially in hot rainy 
season. 
Encourages the transferring of weeds and diseases 

Shading 
Protects young seedlings from high 
temperatures, intensive sunlight at midday 
and from the rain drop impact.  
Grass screen or black plastic net are good 
materials for shading.  
The screen should be supported by pegs of 
40cm above the ground.  
 
 

Pest & Disease control 
Prevent pest & diseases by: 
Treatment of seeds: 
Chemical treatment 
Coat the seeds with fungicides e.g.  
Mercuric chloride 1/1000 solution: Dip the seeds in the 
solution for about 15 minutes then clean them with water to 
wash the excess chemicals 
Copper-oxide dust (rate:2g/100g seed): Shake the dust and 
seeds together in a tightly closed container for few minutes. 
Hot water treatment:  
Treat seed in 50
0
C water for fifteen minutes. This helps 
in reducing the seed born diseases. 
 

Pest & disease control cont... 
Treatment of soil: 
Heat treatment:  
Burn grasses or maize stalks on the seed bed 
before sowing.  
For potted soil: heated in a drum rolled over the 
fire before use. 
Solarization 
Fumigation 

Pest & disease control cont... 
Treatment of seedlings 
Regular spraying is recommended to prevent the 
seasonal diseases (Once a week or every ten (10) day 
period) 
Check the nursery every day to detect the attack and 
population of insects, otherwise it may not sound 
economical to spray insecticides to deal away with the 
already existing pests. 

Pest & disease control cont... 
Treatment of Environment 
Clear the bush around the nursery at least 10 metres 
wide from the boarder.  
The bush may be the middle host to diseases and 
insect pests. 
Sterilising of nursery tools 
Tools used must be sterilised and use them for nursery 
only.     
Washing hands before any operation is required for 
commercial vegetable production. 
 
 

Thinning 
Thinning gives seedlings enough room for growth and become 
healthy seedlings.  
Time for Thinning: When 1
st
 or 2
nd
 true leaves appear (5-10cm 
high) 
How to Thin: Uproot the seedlings to 2-3cm for the first time and 
then 5-10cm for the second time. 
Initial transplanting: Instead of thinning and throwing the 
seedlings away, there is need to transplant them in a new nursery 
at a space of 10cm particularly those that have attained a height of 
about 5-10cm. 
Advantages: 
•It reduces the seed cost since all the seedlings will be utilized. 
•It encourages development of fibrous root system. 
Disadvantage: labour demanding. 
 

Weeding 
The best time to weed is during the fine day 
when the bed is dry particularly in the 
afternoon.  
Uproot by hand to avoid disturbing the 
seedlings. 
 

Top dressing 
Liquid nitrogen fertilizer is convenient for growth of 
seedlings. 
Application method: The ratio of the fertilizer to water 
should be 1:400 (weight) (a handful of either CAN or 
Urea to 10 litres of water).  
Water the solution over the seedlings, then follow with 
fresh water to remove any trace of fertilizer from the 
leaves which if left un-removed may end up in 
scorching the seedlings. 
Granular fertilizer can also be applied between the 
rows of the seedlings followed by fresh watering of the 
nursery. 
 
 

Hardening off 
Done 3-5 days before transplanting 
Reduce frequency of watering  
Expose the seedlings to the sunlight for more hours.  
The aim is to develop strong survival mechanism for 
seedlings by acclimatising them to tough, field 
conditions.  
It also help the plant to resist transplanting shock that 
comes about due to change of the growing place 
(micro-climate). 
It should be done gradually to avoid severe wilting and 
death of the seedlings. 
 

End 
 

Vegetable field management 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 
Lecture 5 

Crop Rotation 
Importance of crop rotation: 
Rotation is one of the basic principles of practical vegetable 
production.  
Attention should be paid when land is being intensively cropped. 
If the same vegetable crop is grown successively on the same 
piece of land for several years, then quality and quantity of the 
yield gradually falls until finally it reaches an un-economic level. 
 
Reduction of yield in both quality and quantity is basically due to the 
following reasons; 
 
a)Accumulation of diseases and pests 
b)Depletion of the particular plant nutrients 
c)Different cultivation treatments 

Rotational method (procedure) 
i.Portion or partition the land to be utilized 
ii.Group the planned vegetables to be grown 
according to their botanical classification 
iii.Make a planting plan each plot in relation to 
number of seasons and crop families  
 
 

Rotational method (procedure) cont... 
i.Portion or partition the land to be utilized 
Divide the land to be utilized into portions or 
plots.  
The number of plots will depend on the area of 
the garden and crops that have planned to be 
grown depending on the marketability of that 
crop as well as farmer preference.  
If the land is large enough, there should be at 
least one plot put to rest every season. 
 
 

Rotational method (procedure) cont... 
(A)Cruciferae   
      (Mustard family) 
a. kale 
b.cabbage 
c.Chinese cabbage 
d.Turnip 
e.Cauliflower 
f.Radish 
 
(B) Solanaceae  (night 
shade family) 
a.tomato 
b.egg-plant 
c.pepper 
d.irish potato 
(C) Cucurbitaceae  
      (gourd family) 
a.cucumber 
b.pumpkin 
c.watermelon 
d.squash 
e.marrows 
 
 
(D) Alliaceae 
a.Onion 
b.leek 
c.garlic 
d.Shallots 
(E) Compositae 
a. lettuce 
 
(F) Umbelliferae 
a.carrot 
b.celery 
c.parsley 
 
 
 
 
 
ii. Group the planned vegetables to be grown according to 
their botanical classification 

Rotational method (procedure) cont... 
iii. Make a planting plan each plot in relation to number of 
seasons and crop families as per example below 
         SEASON 
 
PLOT 
1  2  3 4  5  6  7 
1 Aa Ba Ca Da Ea Fa   
2   Aa Ba Ca Da Ea Fa 
3 Fa   Aa Ba Ca Da Ea 
4 Ea Fa   Aa Ba Ca Da 
5 Da Ea Fa   Aa Ba Ca 
6 Ca Da Ea Fa   Aa Ba 
7 Ba Ca Da Ea Fa   Aa 

Vegetable Bed construction 
Depending on season, type of crop, method of irrigation and 
drainage situation of the soil, vegetable beds may be flat, 
raised or sunken. 
Flat beds- 45cm path, 1-1.2m wide. Plough the beds to a 
depth of 30cm and then level the surface.  
Raised beds- 45cm path, 1-1.2m wide, 15-20 cm high. Plough 
the beds including the path between 20-30cm. Move the soil 
from the path to the bed and level the bed thoroughly 
Sunken beds – 45 cm path, 1-1.2 m wide, 15-20 cm deep. 
Remove the top soil and put it aside. Dig the subsoil to let it 
loose and then bring back the top soil. Paths should be 
constructed using the sub-soil only.   
 

Manure & Fertilizer Application 
Basal dressing 
Organic manure: apply any welly decomposed OM e.g 
animal manure, animal beddings and compost. 
Chemical fertilizers: C-compound (6: 18: 15), D-compound 
(8: 18 : 15) or 23:21: 0 + 4S 
Method of Application:  
Depending on the status of the khola or compost manure use 
2-6 kg compost /m
2 
plus 50g/m
2
 chemical fertilizer  
OR 3-5shovels of compost or khola manure /m
2
 plus one-two 
handfuls/m
2
 chemical fertilizer  
Apply a layer of manure on the bed surface and then 
incorporate them with the soil up to 15-20cm deep. 

Transplanting/planting 
Size and age of the seedlings 
Fully developed or when they have 2-3 true leaves (10-
15cm). 
Small seedlings are difficult to be taken care of while 
overgrown seedlings have poor ability to recover from 
transplanting shock. 
Quality of the seedlings: disease free, strong and 
healthy seedlings and of  uniform size for uniform 
growth and maturity. 
Time for transplanting: cool cloudy day or late in the 
afternoon to avoid severe wilting. 
  

Transplanting/planting cont... 
Procedure in transplanting vegetable seedlings: 
Water the seed bed thoroughly for easy lifting of the seedlings 
Mark the planting stations 
Up-root the seedlings with a ball of soil or could be bare rooted 
Distribute the seedlings to the planting stations. 
Plant the seedlings-mostly below the collar mark. 
Firm the soil around the seedlings and have them standing up 
right 
Water the bed thoroughly 
Shading may be done particularly to the soft vegetables like 
lettuce or Chinese cabbage. Make sure to remove shading within 
2-3days. 
Supplying should be conducted within one week of transplanting 
to achieve uniformity. 
 
 

Transplanting/planting cont... 
Direct sowing/Hilling 
For large seeded vegetables & those that cannot 
regenerate new roots.  
For some small seeded vegetables direct sowing 
can be done particularly in dry season to allow 
them regenerate tap root system & also when 
there is labour shortage. 
 
 
 

Watering  
Frequency of watering 
Check beds moisture condition before watering. Use a peg as 
an indicator-driven in a bed 30cm deep. 
At early stage the dry depth allowed, is 5cm because the root 
system of the plants is still shallow. At a later stage allow a 
dry depth of 10-15cm.  
Time for watering: early in the morning and late 
afternoon 
Irrigation system:  
Large scale production: furrow, sprinkler and drip irrigation 
systems 
Small scale: watering can  
 

Mulching  
A very important practice during dry season in 
order to retain enough moisture on the bed surface 
 

Top dressing 
 Use Nitrogenous fertilizers e.g C.A.N and Urea at an 
early stage for most fruit vegetables 
Amount: 
Early stage- apply 3g per station 
Late stage- apply 8g per station. 
Top-dress 2-4 times depending on the value of the 
crop and growth condition.  
Apply 5-10cm away from the station. 
 
 

Weeding 
Time: sunny day when the surface of the bed is in 
dry condition 
Tools: use hand forks or a trowel to break the 
surface of the bed to improve water holding 
capacity. 
 

Pests and Disease Control 
For effective results in pest and disease control follow good crop 
husbandry measures & aim to reduce chemical use and minimise 
possible costs.  
Therefore: 
Provide good growing environment i.e fertile soil, best climatic 
condition, adequate water, well drained and aerated soils. 
Use cultivars which are more tolerant or resistant to pest and 
diseases. 
Follow strict crop rotation 
Use clean planting materials which are free from pests and 
diseases. 
Practice field hygiene 
Use of biological control 
Chemical spraying as a last resort for prevention and curative 
measure. 
 

Harvesting 
 Indication for readiness: 
Number of growing days after germination or 
transplanting e.g. carrot (100-120 days after 
germination), cabbage (75-110 days after transplanting), 
lettuce (30-45 days after germination) 
Colour: for fruit vegetables e.g tomato, pepper etc) 
Size: for some cucurbitaceae e.g cucumbers) 
Texture e.g onions and cabbages. 

Harvesting cont... 
Time: 
Local markets: harvest early in the morning when the crop still 
has some moisture. 
Truck farming: harvest late in the afternoon when both the crop  
and the weather have cooled and then transport them a night. 
Methods: 
Hands: small scale production  
Tools: medium scale production e,g knives  
Machines: large scale production e.g tillers in carrot harvesting. 
Principles of harvesting 
Keep the produce in fresh condition 
Avoid damages- always aim at a good quality product 
Maintain uniformity of the products 
Send the product to the market on time- vegetables are highly 
perishable 

End 
 

ONION PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 

Onion production 
Scientific Name: Allium cepa  
Family name: Alliaceae 
Suits sub tropical climate and soils 
Biennial grown annually 
Edible part is the bulb while tops are edible 
depending on variety 
Bulb: a bundle made of thick leaf sheaths with 
pungent smell.  
 
 
 
 
 

Uses: 
Bulbs are boiled in soups and stews 
Fried or eaten raw as in salads.  
Leaves are also used for salad particularly the 
spring or bunching onion.  
 
It contains: 87ml water, 48calories, 1.5g protein, 
11g CHO, 30g calcium, 0.5g Iron and many 
other trace elements. 
 

Botanical Characteristics 
Root system: short, straight and shallow 
Stem: small conical underground stem 
Leaves: round and hollow tube leaf. The 
sheaths get thickened at the base and 
bundled as a bulb at a later stage. 
Flowers: has an umbel inflorescence.  
  
 

Climate and Soil requirement 
 
Climate 
Cool season crop.  
Optimum growing temp. 20-26
0
C but not lower 
than 16
0
C for bulb formation.  
Low temperatures encourage flowering.  
Bulb formation in onion is influenced by 
photoperiod.  
 
. 

Climate and Soil requirement cont... 
Soil Conditions 
Onion seedlings are fragile at emergence.   
A well-worked seedbed and light textured soils for 
proper emergence.   
The ideal soil is well-drained with good water-
holding capacity, as onions are shallow-rooted.   
They mature earlier on lighter, sandy soils than on 
heavier soils.   
Onions can grow on a range of soil pH, and do well 
on peat and muck soils 

Cultivars 
Dewilt: straw coloured (yellow/brownish) outer skin 
& light cream flesh. The bulb has a narrow neck & 
good for storage. 
White Lisbon: a good fresh market variety & for 
salad.  
Early Texas Grano: large straw coloured bulbs & 
firm, mild & sweet flesh. Poor for storage  
 

Cultivars cont... 
Granex: early maturing, high yielding, the bulb with 
thin neck,  resistant to pink-root disease, poor for 
storage  
Red-Creole: red skin, very strong flavour of pungent 
smell, late maturing, tolerant to rain or wet season, 
good for storage.  
Red Tropicana: very hard uniform sized bulbs with 
thin neck,  hot taste, late maturing, favours rainy 
season, good for storage  
 



Nursery Management 
Seed rate: 270-330g/1000m2 (36,000-50,000 
seedlings/ 1000m
2
) 
Land preparation 
Nursery bed area: 60-70m
2
 for a field of 1000m
2
  
Plough to 10cm deep  
Manure: 5kg/m
2
 well sieved compost plus a mixture of 
50g S.A and 100g S.P./m
2
 
Bed size: 1m wide & 10cm high with a very fine and well 
levelled surface.  
 

Nursery Management cont... 
Sowing: 
Broadcasting: for a large scale production & cover the 
beds with sieved soils. 
Drilling: for a small scale production (6cm apart, 0.5cm 
deep) 
Mulch the bed & remove after seedling emergency  
Watering: maintain at least 65% moisture content. 
 

Nursery Management cont... 
Top-dressing: once or twice 
1
st
 appl: 15g S.A + 15g Kcl/m
2
  
2
nd
appl: 0.25% Urea liquid when necessary 
Transplanting: done at 35-45 days after 
germination (15-20cm high). 
 

Field management 
Land preparation 
Plough to 30cm deep with a fine tilth. 
Compost manure: 2.5kg/m
2
 (2,500kg/1000m
2
). 
Bed preparation: 60cm wide (2 rows/bed), 1m wide bed 
(4 rows/bed), 1.2m wide (5 rows/bed) 
Basal dress: 40g S.A + 60g S.P + 20g Kcl/ m
2 
 

Field management cont... 
Transplanting:  
Harden off seedlings (3-4days before transplanting).  
Up-root seedlings with bare roots and distribute them 
on the beds 
Spacing: 20 by 10cm between rows and plants 
respectively 
 

Field management cont... 
Watering  
65% moisture content at early stage of crop establishment, 
50% bulbing & 40% harvesting  stage. 
Irrigation method:  furrow irrigation for 2 rows, exceeding 
that use flood irrigation and sprinkler irrigation.  
The level of water should not exceed the sheaths of the 
leaves.  
For the sprinkler irrigation,  complete before 11.00am to 
give chance for beds to dry up in order to avoid fungal 
diseases. 
 
 

Field management cont... 
Top-dressing: for a field of 1000m
2
 use: 
1
st
 appl (after 10days of transplanting): 16kg S.A + 20kg 
SP + 4kg Kcl 
2
nd
 appl (20days after 1
st 
appl): 16kg S.A + 10kg S.P + 
4kg Kcl 
3
rd
 appl (20days after 2
nd
 appl): 16kg S.A only depending 
on growth condition. 
 

Diseases 
Black spot (Altarnaria leaf spot or Altarnaria porri): 
fungal 
 Symptoms: brown spots on the leaves which eventually turn 
to black and get broken 
Control: spray Dithane M45, crop rotation 
 Rust (Puccinia allii), fungal 
Symptoms: small raised spots, rust like spread on leaves. At a 
later stage, the leaves are with yellow dust like spores. 
Control: spray fungicides at an early stage e.g. copper-oxy-
chloride. 
 

Diseases cont... 
Leaf blight (Plespora herbarium): fungal 
Symptoms: looks like leaf spot in the beginning, but there 
are white spots on leaves, and  then increased to black and 
purple with a coal like mould spreading on the surface. It 
may turn to yellow and wilt later on.  
Control:  crop rotation and fungicides spray 
Black mold (Aspergillus niger): fungal 
Symptoms: black or brown spots on the bulb which 
increase to inner sidescausing bulb rotting. Its common in 
storage. 
Control – avoid harvesting in rain condition, remove the 
damaged bulbs before packing or storing. 
 

Pests 
Onion Maggot(Delia antiqua)  
Most serious in onions.  
Damage both the roots & bulbs.  
Its first larva causes the greatest damage to very 
young plants. 
Over-winters in the soil. 
 2
nd
 & 3
rd
 generation prefer injured or dying tissue.   
Control: Avoid damaging or bruising any of the crop 
during harvest , control onion maggot flies by spraying 
Cymbush and Ripcord.   
 

Pests cont... 
Other pests: aphids, army worms, Thrips can 
cause economical damage.  
Control: pesticides e.g. carbaryl,  Malathion, 
Dimethoate & Actellic E.C. 
 

Harvesting 
Indication: shrinking of the plant’s neck & bending 
(lodging) of the neck. 
When harvesting, pull the bulb out by holding the 
leaves and trim the roots with a small knife.  
Cut the leaves 2-3cm above the neck  
Keep the bulb in the field 2-3days for drying and 
then take them indoor for further drying and 
storage. 
 

Storage 
Cut the leaves & spread the bulbs on the shelves.  
Keep the leaves by hanging them in bundles. 
Refrigerator at 2
0
C (bulbs can stay for 6 months) 
Yield potential: 60-100 tonnes/ha with good 
management. 
 

End 

TOMATO PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 

Tomato production 
Scientific name: Lycopersicon esculentum 
Family: Solanaceae 
Herbaceous, Fruit vegetable  

Uses and nutrition 
Cultivated tomatoes vary in size & colour 
Size:  
Tom berries (5mm in diameter), cherry tomatoes & wild 
tomatoes (1–2 cm), beefsteak tomatoes (10 cm or more in 
diameter).  
Commercially grown tomatoes (5–6 cm diameter) 
Colour:  most produce red fruit; others: yellow, orange, 
pink, purple, green, black, or white & multi-coloured  
Red tomatoes, raw nutritional value per 100g: CHO 4g, 
sugars 2.6g, dietary fiber 1.0g, fat 0.2g, protein 1.0g, 
water 95.0g and vitamin c 13mg.  

Uses and nutrition cont.. 
Raw: salads 
Cooked: in soups & stews  
Processed e.g canning , souces, jams, juices 
Medicinal: lycopene: antioxidant –prevents cancer & 
improves skin ability to protect aaginst harmful UV lays 
Plant toxicity:  
Leaves, stems, and green unripe fruit of the tomato 
plant contain solanine  which is toxic to humans and 
animals.  
The fresh fruit is however harmless. 

Botanical characteristics 
Stem: annual & herbaceous, up to 2m high especially 
in tall varieties, hairy stems with a strong odour.  
Leaves: spirally arranged, up to 30cm long and 10-
15cm across. Lobed leaf blade and divided. 
Flowers: diameter of up to 2cm and are borne in 
inflorescences of 4-12 flowers. Short calyx and 
remains green when the fruit ripens. Flowers are 
borne opposite or between leaves 
Fruit: green fleshy berry, yellow or red when ripe, 
smooth or with longitudinal furrows. 
 

Environmental requirements 
Climate:   
Temperature:  
Optimum: 23-26
0
C  
High air temperatures  e.g 27
0
C can cause pollen sterility while 
high night temperatures affects flower initiation.  
Optimum night temps : 8-20
0
C  
High and low temperatures affect fruit quality, particularly colour 
of the fruits.  
Temps below 13
o
C affect both pollination and fertilization 
Altitude 
2000m asl, slightly above 500 m for high yields, 
Yields at low elevation are low due to lack of diurnal temperature 
variation and high humidity which encourages leaf diseases though 
some cultivars do better 
 

Environmental requirements cont.. 
Rainfall (Moisture) 
Excessive rainfall often harm the tomato crop due to  
prolonged leaf diseases during humid conditions.  
Uneven levels of water combined with a lack of either 
calcium or potassium in the soil can lead to 
physiological disorders of the fruit known as Blossom-
end rot.  
Erratic irrigation may cause cracking and splitting of 
the fruit skin.  
Tomato is best produced under irrigation 
 

 

Environmental requirements 
Soils  
Wide range of soils  
Fertile soils with a good moisture-retaining 
capacity and relatively high level of organic 
material are the best.  
pH 5 - 6.5 
Low soil temperature often retards growth of 
seedlings. 

Cultivars 
Variety  Stem type 
 Fruit shape 
 & size 
 Other attributes Maturity period 
Money 
maker 
Indeterminate 
(tall) 
Global & smooth, 
with thick and firm 
skin 
High yielding & resistant to 
Fusarium wilt.  
90 -120 days 
Rodade Semi-dwarf Round and smooth 
Resistant to bacterial wilt. 
Good for fresh market. 
90 -95 days 
Floridade Dwarf  Flat round 
Good shelf life. Resistant 
to Altenaria stem canker 
80 -85 days 
Heinz 
1370 
Dwarf  
Flat round and 
medium 
Resistant to Fusarium wilt 85 days  
  
Zest  
Indeterminate 
(tall) 
Round  Resistant to Fusarium wilt 
  
85 days 
Zeal Semi-dwarf Flat, round & large Resistant fusarilum wilt 85 days 
Roma dwarf Oval and round Good storage 80-85days 

Nursery Management 
Seed beds: 1m wide and 10–15 cm high 
Seed rate: 20-30g/1000m
2
  
Basal dress: compost: 2 -5kgs/m
2
. 
Sowing: drills 10-15cm & 0.5cm deep.  
Mulch after sowing 
Water regularly, up until 25-30 days after germination when 
seedlings are ready for transplanting . However, when initial 
transplanting is to be done, seedlings will take about 30-
45days before transplanting.  
Harden off for 4-5 days before actual transplanting to 
acclimatise them to the field conditions. 
Spray the fungicides regularly at least once a week to protect 
the seedlings against fungal diseases. 
 

Field management 
Land Preparation 
Plough at 20-30cm & break the clods.   
Beds: 1.2m wide, ridges: 1.2m apart.  
Manure  & fert:  
Compost: 2kg/  m
2
 plus 50g of compound C (6:18:15) or 
23:21:0 + 4s/ m
2 
Excess nitrogen should be avoided as it will only promote 
vegetative growth at the expense of reproduction growth. 
It may also delay fruiting process and hence reduce fruit 
quality.  
Nitrogen should be applied sparingly after the second 
flower truss has set.   

Field management cont... 
Transplanting: 
Spacing are 70cm by 45cm (for a bed of 100cm 
wide) and 90cm by 60cm (for a 1.2m bed). 
Adopt a closer spacing for dwarf varieties during 
rainy season and where a single training system is 
to be used.  
Similarly, a wider spacing is to be used in tall 
varieties during rainy season and when double 
stem training is used.  
 

Field management cont... 
Plastic Mulch:  
Black plastic mulch may be used in rainy and very 
cold season to speed maturity and also increase 
yield.  
If plastic mulch is used, all fertilizer should be put 
down prior to laying plastic.  
Drip irrigation plus fertigation will help increase 
yield.  
 

Plastic mulched 
tomatoes 

Important management practices 
Staking 
This refers to pegging out sticks which support the plant stems 
more especially in tall or indeterminate cultivars.  
The practice facilitates crop management practices i.e. weeding, 
tilling,... and also improves the quality of tomatoes by keeping the  
plants off the ground. 
Unstaked tomatoes produce a high proportion of unmarketable 
fruit and are often difficult to manage with respect to pest and 
disease control. 
Wall staking in rainy season  and cross staking dry season are the 
most recommended methods for fresh market tomatoes.  
Cross staking will also help in conserving moisture during dry 
season.    

Staked 
tomatoes 

Important management practices 
Pruning 
Removal of side-shoots to control excessive branching 
of the tomato plant. 
It also minimises competition besides modifying the 
plant canopy as a means of controlling diseases.  
These side shoots should be removed whilst young and 
tender to avoid damaging the main stem.  
Leaf pruning (defoliation) should be done as well to 
reduce the size of primary inoculum which is often 
found in the leaves touching the ground.  
 
 

Important management practices 
Training 
This is a system of developing a productive plant stems that 
can support growth.  
Single stem or double stem training is recommended for 
most indeterminate tomatoes.  
But for determinate table cultivars, five branches will still 
give good quality.  
The second stem should be developed below the first 
cluster to give strong braches.  
The stems should be trained along the stakes or trellises by 
tying them loosely. 

Important management practices 
Water management 
Good water management in tomato growing is 
important for increased fruit weight (yield) and disease 
control.  
Tomato normally use 500 litres of water for its growth 
and this is best applied by surface irrigation as opposed 
to overhead methods which promote foliar diseases. 
Avoid applying water to the leaves but rather to the 
soil. 
 

Diseases 
Late Blight  (Phytophthora infestans): fungal 
Symptoms: Black to brown lesions on the leaves and often such 
leaves may wilt and die off.  
Control: fungicides: Dithane M45 (every 7-10days after 
transplanting or 3-4 days during continous rainy condtions) 
Bacterial canker  
Symptoms: Stems are infected with some localized lesions or 
spots which develop on the foliage or fruit of the plant (light 
halo around the spot).   
Occurrence and the degree of the infection are variable. 
Control: crop rotation, sanitation, seed treatment.  During 
transplanting seedling roots may be dipped in nevobiocin (a 
bactericide). 

Late blight  
on leaves 
Late blight  
on stems 
Late blight  
on fruit 
Bacterial canker  
on leaves 
Bacterial  
Canker 
on  
fruit 
Bacterial canker  
on stems 

Pests 
Red Spider Mites (Tetranychus spp)  
Found on the underside leaves 
Causes mottling and silvering of leaves.  
Prevention: crop rotation, sanitation, interplanting with 
aromatic plants like marigold & increasing humidity, 
pesticides: Dimethoate 40% EC or Actellic EC, Dicofol and 
Malathion 
Nematodes (Meloidogyne spp)  
Galls on the roots which lead to stunting or growth 
retardation. 
Control: crop rotation of at least 3 – 4 seasons. 
 

Harvesting 
Potential yield: 50 tonnes/ha 
1
st
 harvest at 2 – 2
1
/
2
 months after transplanting & 
picking can continue up 3 – 3
1
/
2
 months depending on 
the variety. 
Harvest tomato early in the morning but after dew has 
dried up to avoid rotting and also when the fruits have 
not accumulated more heat in order for them to store 
longer.  
For a distant market harvest at a mature green or 
breakers stage before they are fully ripe.  
This is when the fruit develops a red colour of about a 
one-tambala size at its blossom-end.   
 

Grading 
Grade size and variety 
Pack in a shallow grass-lined baskets or 
wooden boxes that can only carry between 8-
14kg of fruit. 
Cartons of 44cm x 20 x 10cm which can carry 
about 5kg of fruits may also be used 
 

End 
 

CABBAGE PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 

Cabbage production 
 
Scientific name: Brassica oleracea 
Family: Brassicaceae or Cruciferae 
Leafy vegetable 
Herbaceous, biennial, dicotyledonous flowering plant 
distinguished by a short stem upon which is crowded a 
mass of leaves, usually green but in some varieties red 
or purplish, which while immature form a characteristic 
compact, globular cluster (cabbagehead).  
The plant is also called head cabbage. 

Uses 
Raw: salads 
In Cookery:  added soups  & stews, boiled   
Fermented and preserved:  
Pickled with brine of its own juice with salt, and left in 
a warm place for several weeks to ferment. 
Pickled in vinegar with various spices, alone or in 
combination with other vegetables.  
Medicinal properties e.g.   
Contains glutamine (an amino acid) which has anti-
inflammatory properties,  
Dieting programs 
 
 

Botanical Characteristics 
Root: shallow & fibrous. 
Stem: short & fleshy. 
Leaf: large leaf blade (up to 30 by 30 cm), round, oval 
(elliptical) in shape, wrinkled (savoy) leaves, varying 
with varieties, waxy (referred to as bloom):giving the 
plant characteristics of disease and water loss 
tolerance. The sharp or bitter taste sometimes present 
in cabbage is due to glucosinolate (s). Cabbages are 
also a good source of Riboflavin 
Flowers: yellow coloured, raceme inflorescence 
Fruits:  silique (a short pod of two carpels with replum) 
or is partitioned.  
 
 

Common Cultivars  
Different varieties (cultivars) vary in yield, heat tolerance, pest 
and disease resistance, growing periods etc. 
Large Drum head: high yielding, round and flat heads and 
long growing period. 
Gloriy of Enkhuzen: medium in head size and medium 
growing period. 
Golden acre : medium growing period &  good quality leaf 
(tender leaves). 
Oscross (r): large headed, vigorous in growth, high yielding. 
Suitable for cold season or highland regions. But it is not good 
for storage. 
Copenhagen market : heat tolerant variety, small and solid 
round headed variety. 
 

Common Cultivars  
Sugar loaf: early maturing variety, sweet and pointed head. It 
is susceptible to many pest attack because of its sweetness. 
Stone head (F): small, round headed and early maturing. 
Marious Market : tolerant to heat and wilt. Firm headed and 
of good quality and is adaptable to wide range of soils. 
Nagaoka all season (Japanese variety):large headed and 
uniform in size, weigh up to 10kg under good management. 
Yesen  (Chinese variety): flat round heads, very tender leaves 
hence susceptible to Plutella (Diamond -Back moth) 
 

Soil and climate requirements 
Climate:  
Cool season /high land crop.  
Some special cultivars can be grown as warm 
season/lowland 
Optimum temp: 25
o
C 
Altitude:  800m asl 
Soil:  
Sandy loam soil rich in organic matter  
Clay loam soil will need an addition of organic matter like 
compost or farm yard manure.  
Wide range of soil so long they are free draining.  
pH of 6.5 -6.8 
 

Nursery management 
Seedbed preparation:  
Plough 15-20cm deep 
Manure & compost: compost: 2.5 kg/m
2 
plus compound 
fertilizer e.g. C – compound (6:18:15) or D- compound 
(8:18:15) at  50g /m
2
  
Level the bed surface 
 
Sowing: drills of 10-12cm apart or broad-cast for a 
large scale production.  
Mulching 
 

Nursery management cont... 
Watering: use fine rosed watering can 
Spraying chemicals:  
Done regularly  
Field hygiene & good management necessary to reduce cases 
of pests and diseases 
Top-dressing: 
Liquid N and potash fertilizer (1:400, fertilizer: water weight 
measure OR one handful fertilizer in 10 litres of water) 
Apply clean water on the seedlings after the fertilizer to 
avoid scorching the leaves. 
Weeding 
Transplanting:25-30days or 30-45 days (4-6 true leaves)  
 

Field management 
Land preparation 
Plough: 20-30cm deep 
Basal dress: compost or khola manure: 2kg or 5kg 
respectively,  Compound C (6:18:15): 50g/m
2
. 
Bed preparation 
Ridges: in wet seasons or where water is not a problem 
i.e. furrows irrigation for commercial production.  
Two-row beds: 1-1.2m wide and 15cm high, Sunken 
beds may also be used especially in dry season. 
 

Field management cont... 
Transplanting: 
Time:  late in the afternoon or on a cool cloudy day to 
avoid severe wilting of the transplants. 
Size of seedling: 4-6 true leaves (25-30 or 30-45 days 
after germination) 
Select disease free , strong and uniform seedlings for 
uniform growth  and maturity 
Spacing varies: 
•60 X 50 cm: small headed varieties e.g. Stone head (F) 
•65 X 50 cm: medium headed varieties e.g. Glory of Enkhuzen 
•70 X 60 cm: large headed varieties e.g. Drum head 
 
 

Field management cont.... 
Irrigation systems: 
Bucket or water can: small scale production 
Furrow irrigation: where water is in good supply 
Sprinkler irrigation: where water is in short supply 
Drip irrigation: where water is a problem 
 
Due to their large leaf area, cabbage requires at least 25cm of 
water/ week to sustain good growth. 
Excessive watering late: head-splitting.  
Uneven soil moisture can cause fluctuations in the uptake of 
nutrients and lead to tip burn or head-splitting.  
Field capacity of soil: 60 to 70 percent to ensure good yields 
and head quality. 
 
 

Field management cont... 
Weeding 
Weed to reduce competition which slow both 
emergence and early growth.  
Control: shallow tillage, herbicides: Round-up, 
Venture. 

Diseases 
Clubroot (Plasmodiophora brassicae): 
•Soilborne active in slightly acidic soils 
•Symptoms: Wart-like growths or knots on the base of the plant, 
restricting water and nutrient uptake.  
•Control: clean transplants, maintaining soil pH above 7.3, 
disinfecting tillage equipment, crop rotation & weeding, 
fumigation  
Black rot (Xanthomonas campestris): 
•Symptoms: yellowing of the leaves edges that slowly works into 
the centre of the leaf & later turn brown and dry up, heading may 
fail, offensive odour 
•Seedborne, transmitted by contact or water splash.  
•Control: use certified & treated seed, crop rotation, in green 
houses where it is very  control by watering from the bottom of 
trays and the use of copper based foliar sprays.  

Diseases 
Downy Mildew (Peronospora parasitica): fungal 
Fungus over-winters in perennial plants and 
infected plant debris.  
Symptoms: tan paper-like appearance that 
continues to develop into larger, sunken areas on 
the head.  
Control: crop rotation, preventative applications of 
Bravo 500, Clean Crop Copper 53W or Zineb 80W. 
 
 

Pests 
Cruciferous flea beetle (Phyllotreta cruciferae):  
Small black beetles attack cabbages throughout the 
growing season.  
Dangerous in the spring to emerging seedlings  
Feed on emerging cabbage crops causing seedling death, 
uneven growth and maturity.  
They have one generation per year, but the adults 
appear twice, once early in the spring and again later in 
the fall. 
Control: crop rotation, eliminating cruciferous weeds, 
chemicals: Ambush, Di-syston, Endosulfan, Matador, 
Pounce, Ripcord, Sevin, Thiodan or Thionex. 

Pests cont... 
Cabbage Maggot: (Delia radicum) 
Underground pest, feeds on the roots  
The survival rate of the eggs is highest when the weather is 
cool and moist, much like spring conditions.  
Severely stunt growth or kill seedlings, lower quality and 
reduce yields of more mature plants.  
The maggot is the larval stage of the cabbage maggot fly, 
which looks much like a common housefly.  
The lifecycle has two generations per season.  
Control: crop rotation, eradication of cruciferous weeds, 
chemicals by a drench placed near the seed at planting or  
foliar application of Lorsban, Pyrinex, or Sniper.  
 

Pests cont... 
Cabbage Looper (Tricoplusia ni)/ cabbage butterfly.  
Chew large holes in the leaves and head of cabbages. 
Their waste products contaminate the head. 
Control: crop rotation,  eradication of cruciferous weeds, chemical: 
malathion, dimethoate, cymbush, decis, endosulfan  
Diamondback Moth (Plutella xylostella)  
Larvae chew irregular patterns into the lower leaves.  
The larvae also tunnel into the head of the cabbage, hurting its 
market potential.  
Control:  crop monitoring, eradicating any cruciferous plants and 
weeds, chemical: malathion, dimethoate, cymbush, decis, 
Endosulfan, Orthene, Ripcord, Sevin, Thiodan. 
 
 

Physiological disorders 
Head splitting:  
Caused by excessively rapid growth. 
Manage it by ensuring there is adequate organic 
matter to hold soil moisture, providing consistent 
even watering, avoiding over-fertilizing with 
nitrogen, and spacing close and evenly to 
discourage excess and rapid root growth.  
Cull cracked heads, as they become an entry 
point for secondary infections such as soft rot.  

Physiological disorders... 
Tip-burn:  
Caused by inadequate amounts of calcium in 
the youngest region of the plant.  
Usually, this is due to rapid growth.  
Occurs when the translocation of calcium to 
the growing tip is slowed. 
No initial outer symptoms on the cabbage 
head, but the inner leaves turn brown.  

Harvesting 
Indication: large and firm heads , delay leads to head burst.  
Treatment:  
Time:  early morning after dew is dry, for long distance market, 
harvest in the afternoon & packing must be done late after the 
temperature has cooled for easy transporting to the market. 
Packing with hot temperatures leaves may lose their condition 
and cause rotting inside the heads. 
Method of harvesting: Cut the heads and turn them up-down 
on the station. Apply lime at the cut stem to avoid soft-rot. 
Packing: remove some of the outer leaves and keep two-
three loose leaves for rapping the head. Put wrapped heads in 
aerated containers not more than four layers for easy lifting. 
Yields: 30 to 40 tones/ ha depends on the variety and 
management  
 

End 
 

CARROT PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 

Carrot production 
Scientific name: Daucus carota. 
Family: Umbelliferae (Parsley family) 
Root vegetable 
The plant is a biennial but is grown as an 
annual crop. 
 
 
 

Nutritional value and health benefits 
It contains Beta carotene 
Beta carotene  
Substance that is converted to Vitamin A in the human 
body. 
Powerful antioxidant effective in fighting against some 
forms of cancer, especially lung cancer.  
Protects against stroke, and heart disease. 
Nutrition Facts  
Half cup of cooked carrots contain 35g clories, 86g protein, 
8.19g carbohydrates, 2g dietary fiber, 24.18mg calcium, 
0.47mg iron, 23.4 phosphorus, 19, 152μl vitamin A  and 
1.79 vitamin C. 
 

Plant morphology 
Roots: tap-root system (for food). Thickness of the cortex 
differs with varieties. Thicker cortex indicates good quality 
and maturity. 
•Stem: small , succulent, cone shaped stem the top of the tap-
root. Once the stem is damaged by diseases or pests, the 
whole plant will collapse within short time. 
Leaf: fern like leaves having long petiole but no leaf blade 
Flower:  once the tap-root has fully developed, through 
period of dormancy, the stem elongates to one-metre tall and 
forms the flowers. The flowers are compound umbel 
inflorescence of white in colour. 
Fruit: mature fruit is sharp pointed at both ends  
Seed: light brown or greyish, small & light, seed weight: 
1.5g/1000seeds. 

Cultivars 
Chanteny: long cone shape tap-root (about 
15cm), thinner root cortex and thicker core (pith) 
Nantes: thicker cortex, more cylindrical, fine 
textured and sweet variety, 70days to maturity  
Early Cape Market: more cylindrical and shorter 
than chanteny, sweet, brighter orange colour. 
Ideal: high yielding, sweet, much thinner core 
than that of Nantes.  

Ecological Requirements 
Climate 
Temps: 16 to 23
o
C for good germination and growth. 
Cool dry weather prefered 
High soil temperatures will encourage the  development 
of lateral roots and of pale yellow in colour.  
Grows  best in high altitude areas and is tolerant to a wide 
range of rainfall. 
Soil  
Deep sandy loam soil, free from stones, clods, rough trash,  
pH of 6-6.6 
Too much of organic matter or heavy clay soils causes 
forking 
 

Field Management 
Land preparation 
Ploughing depth: >30cm 
Remove stones and all other debris from the beds.  
Rough beds cause forking of the tap-root while shallow 
beds cause green shoulders. 
Manure:  1-2kg per 1m
2
, Basal dress using compound 
fertilizer: 50g/m
2
. 
Bed Construction 
Size: 1-1.2m wide and 15-20cm high.  
Raised beds for drainage (Too much moisture promotes 
root rot disease) 

Field Management 
Sowing  
Sow thinly and direct on the cropping beds  
In drills: 30cm apart.  
In stations: 30 by 10cm with 5-6 seeds per 
station.  
Cover the seeds with fine sand to a depth of 1cm 
for easy germination.  
The seed requirement for 1 hectare of land is 5-6 
kg. 
 

Field Management 
Thinning  
After germination, thin out the young seedlings 
to 5cm apart at first, then to 10cm apart after 
one-week.  
Done before the plants have reached 5-8cm tall 
to avoid competition and deformation of the 
roots. 
Weeding  
This should be intensified at an early stage of the 
crop development to avoid competition over 
sunlight and nutrients. 

Field Management 
Top-dressing 
Apply nitrogen fertilizer e.g. C.A.N or Urea at the rate of 30-
33g/m
2
. 
By drilling along the rows when the plants have reached 5-
8cm tall. 
 
Watering 
•Keep carrot beds in well moistened condition.  
•Irregular quantities of water will cause split root problems.  
•Ensure good drainage system at all the times.  
 
Banking  
•Earth up (bank) to avoid green shoulder problem  

Pests 
Nematodes:  
Damage tap root tips  
Causes forking & galls on the tap-rot surface.  
Control: crop rotation, resistant cultivars, application of 
nematicide before sowing. 
Diamond-Back moth(Plutella):  
The larva of the moth (green in colour) does damage the 
leaves.  
Control: spraying Malathion or Sevin (carbaryl) 
Aphids: green or black in colour. 
Suck the sap from the leaves and young growing points 
causing curling and distortion of the leaves.  
Control: spray Dimethoate or Malathion.   
 

Pests 
 

Diseases 
Leaf spot (Cercospora sp): Fungal disease  
Spots on older leaves.  
Control: fungicides e.g. Dithane M45, Daconil or Copper-
oxy-chloride  
Leaf bright: fungal disease 
Serious in wet weather, destruction to the crop leaves 
Control: fungicides e.g. Dithane M45. 
Bacteria soft-rot: bacterial disease  
Watery stuff exudes from the plant giving an offensive 
smell.  
Control: field hygiene, crop rotation, avoid mechanical 
damage to the plant 
 

Harvesting 
Indication for readiness (maturity) 
Diameter size: the root shoulder should be 
flat and 4-5cm in diameter.  
It is important to harvest carrot when the 
roots are still tender (not woody).  
Some baby carrots may be harvested when 
the roots are 1.5-3cm wide and flat. 
Crop age: harvest when the crop is 100-120 
days after germination.  
 

Methods of harvesting 
Larger scale production: tillers  
Small scale production: hoes or uproot by 
hand.  
It is recommended to have the bed moist 
when harvesting 

 

End 
 

FRUIT PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 
Lecture 9 

INTRODUCTION TO FRUIT 
PRODUCTION 
Definition  
 
Part of a plant that contains the seeds and often 
used as food 
Ripened ovary or group of ovaries and its 
contents 
Commonly eaten straight/raw as dessert or snack  
The study of growing fruit trees is referred to as 
Pomology.  
 

IMPORTANCE OF FRUITS 
Food; vitamins, proteins minerals and carbohydrate 
Staple food e.g plantains and bananas 
 Supplementary food e.g mango, guava, apple, oranges 
 Processed fruit products are also important source of food, 
e.g juice, jam, wine and vinegar. 
Income to individual and institutions through domestics 
sales and foreign exchange earnings to the country 
through export  
Employment; selling, marketing and processing industries 
Environment conservation 
Raw materials for agro based industries 
Fruit trees provide shade and beatify the landscape 
Fuel; pruned branches 
 
 
 

CLASSIFICATION OF FRUITS 
Classification is based on the  following: 
According to the type of plant 
Botanical classification 
According to climate 
According to the type of the fruit 

According to the type of the plant 
Woody fruits and herbaceous fruits 
Woody fruits: borne on woody plants e.g mango, 
guavas, avocado pears and oranges 
Herbaceous fruits: borne on herbaceous plants e.g 
bananas, paw-paws, strawberry etc. 
Evergreen fruits and deciduous fruits 
Evergreen fruits: maintain their leaves all year round 
e.g. mango, banana, macadamia and orange 
Deciduous fruits: shed off all their leaves at once e.g 
apple, peach 
 
 

Botanical classification 
Useful classification for scientific communication, 
identification, when developing new materials 
Each fruit is identified by its botanical name and the family 
 
Common name Botanical name Family name   
•Banana   Musa sapientum Musaceae 
•Coconut  Cocos nucifera Palmaceae 
•Pineapple  Ananas comosus Bromeliaceae 
•Fig   Ficus carica  Moraceae 
•Avocado  Persea americana  Lauraceae 
•Apple  Malus domestica Rosaceae 
•Strawberry  Fragaria chiloensis Rosaceae 
•Tangerine (Manderin)Citrus reticulata Rutaceae 
 

Botanical classification 
•Lemon Citrus limon  Rutaceae 
•Mango Mangifera indica Anacardiaceae 
•Grape Vitis vinifera  Vitaceae 
•Papaya Carica papaya   Caricaceae 
•Guava Psidium guajava  Myrtaceae 
•Macadamia Macadamia integrifolia  Proteaceae 
 nut  
•Peach Prunus persica  Rosaceae 
•Litchi Litchi chinensis  Rosaceae 
  

According to the climatic requirements 
This classification is based on areas where the fruit 
crops are well adapted. 
Tropical fruits 
Between Tropics of Cancer and Capricorn which lay 
between 23
o 
North and South of Equator 
The climates of these regions have average temperatures 
of about 27
o
C with high humidity e.g. bananas, mango, 
coconut etc.  
Temperate fruits 
Within the temperate zones of latitude 23
o
- 66
o
 North and 
South of Equator.  
The climates of such these regions have cool seasons 
almost all the year round. E.g. apple, peach, pear, plum 
and many others. 
 
 

According to the climatic requirements 
Sub-tropical fruits. 
These are fruits grown between tropical and 
temperate climates. These include guava, orange, 
macadamia etc.  
 
Tropical and sub-tropical fruits are usually evergreen 
while the temperate ones are deciduous.   
 

According to the type of the fruit 
The anatomical structure of the fruits itself may be 
used to classify certain fruits 
Pome (Kernal) fruits: have soft seed tissue e.g 
apple, pear  
 
 
 
 
 
 

Stone (Drupe) fruits: have hard shelled seed 
are classified as drupe fruits e.g peach, plum, 
mangoes, olive and apricot. 
 
 
 

Berry fruits: Fruits are fleshy and have their 
seeds laying in the pulp, e.g strawberry, 
banana, paw-paw, fig, avocado etc. 
 

 Nut: have their edible parts protected by hard 
seed shell. E.g cashew-nut, macadamia nut etc 
 

According to the type of the fruit 
The morphological structure may also be used to 
classify fruits 
Simple fruits 
Simple fruits develop from a single matured ovary 
in a single flower e.g. mango, banana 
 
Multiple fruits 
Multiple fruits consist of the matured ovaries of 
several to many flowers more or less united into a 
mass. e.g. pineapple, fig 
 

end 
 

ORCHARD ESTABLISHMENT 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
 
Lecture 12 

ORCHARD ESTABLISHMENT 
•Requires good planting materials and correct 
type of fruits for production 
•Requires a proper site 
 
 

Planting materials for fruits 
 
•Seeds: for most herbaceous fruits e.g. Papaya, 
Coconut, melon, granadilla and date-palm. 
•Vegetative propagation 
–Recommended 
–Only method for fruits like bananas and pine 
apples 
 

Orchard site selection 
•Site offers proper conditions for production of 
fruits. 
•Site selection is a major task for successful 
fruit investment since fruit trees are a long 
term crop (first harvest 2-5 years & continuous 
harvest 30-50 years) 
 

Factors to consider in site selection: 
•Environmental factors 
–Climate 
•Temperature:  
–All fruit trees have their specific optimum growing 
temperature e.g. Bananas (avg temp 25
o
C) while an apple 
(avg temp 10
o
C.) 
–Max and min temps are important to consider  eg.  A 
banana will be injured permanently under the temperature 
range of below 10
o
C. Effect on flower differentiation e.g. 
temperate fruits need a period of low temperature (below 
5
o
c) for a period of 1-3 months for dormancy thereafter 
they may develop healthy flowers. 

•Rainfall  
–Avg range 600-3000mm 
–A period of dormancy for flower differentiation required for  
some fruit trees 
•Sunlight 
–For photosynthesis  
–More sunlight more healthy plants 
–Avoid areas with too much cloudy weather,  close to a hill or 
forest 
–Soil type: fertile & well drained soils preferred. 
Also consider depth, texture, pH, drainage, 
structure 
 

–Topography: flat or gentle slope land, where steep 
slopes consider terracing (costly because of soil & 
water conservation, transport, and the irrigation 
system. 
–Water source: reliable 

•Social factors 
–Access to main road 
–Nearness to the market 
–Convenient transport system 
–Available labour force 
–Good security mechanism 
–Close to agricultural consulting institutions  

Orchard site selection 
•Physiological factors: factors that a fruit tree may 
require for good growth and quality of the fruits. 
–Nutrient elements 
•Carbohydrate: products of photosynthesis e.g. Sugar, glucose, starch, 
fibre and cellulose 
•Nitrogen:  
–main element of protein  
–found in the buds and young branches and new roots 
–For vegetative growth 
–Also concerned with the flower differentiation of the fruit trees.  
–Deficiency: Yellowing and dropping of older leaves as well as premature 
dropping of fruits  
–C/N ratio in the plants indicates its maturity condition.  
 
 

•Phosphorus 
–An essential element of the nucleus 
–Its concentration is in cell division and plant growth.  
–Deficiency: may result in fruit trees showing dark green, blue green or 
red-purple leaves especially at the midrib and petioles. Stunted growth 
and slowness in root and flower development 
•Potassium 
–Plays an important role in the carbohydrate synthesis  
–Helps in the building up of sugars, starch and fibre in the fruits.  
–Deficiency: often results in leaf margins being tanned and scorched or 
has necrotic spots (pronounced on recently matured leaves before 
older leaves are affected). Tasteless and poor storage life. 
 

–Water and its role in fruit growing 
•Main part of the plant and the fruit (Fruits 80-90% , fruit trees  
50%) 
–The plant will collapse if water is in short supply. 
•Source of elements: hydrogen and oxygen  for photosynthesis 
•Main carrier of plant food: minerals from the soil, CHO from 
leaves 
–Water stress will cause malnutrition to the plant particularly the soil-
bound nutrition. 

–Leaf  
•Place for photosynthesis 
•Materials needed for growth and storage depend on the 
production of plant food by leaves. 
•Manufactured CHO: used for used for respiration, growth, and 
storage (both in plant and fruit).  
•Number or total area of leaves of the fruit tree is important to 
have good quality and quantity yields 
–E.g. A banana plant requires at least 7-8 leaves on one plant to 
maintain normal development of the plant. 
•Reduction of number of leaves due to water stress, diseases 
and pest will weaken the fruit trees. Eventually this will 
degrade quality of the fruit and affects flower differentiation in 
the next fruiting season.       
 
 

End  

FRUIT PROPAGATION 
TECHNIQUES 
 
 
Lecture 11 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 

FRUIT PROPAGATION TECHNIQUES 
Propagation should aim at developing fruit 
tree cultivars that are both high yielding, early 
fruit setting and resistant to the common pest 
and disease attack.  
It should involve broad species that are locally 
and readily available within the reach. 
 

The propagation of fruits is either sexual or 
asexual 
Sexual propagation : seeds 
Asexual or vegetative propagation: plant parts 
other than seeds 
 

Sexual propagation by seed 
Seeds result from the fertilization of ovules 
 There is an exchange of genetic material 
through cross-pollination 
Advantages 
Easy to transport 
Cheaper and easy to raise 
Plant breeding 
Only method for some fruit species 
 
 
 
 

Disadvantages: 
Long time take to start producing fruits 
Not true to type seedlings produced. 
Difficulties in seed germination. 
 
 
  

Seed sources 
Collect seed from vigorous, healthy plants 
with desirable characteristics. 
Collect good quality seeds that are free from 
diseases and insects, clean and fresh from 
desired cultivars 
Obtain from reliable or suitable sources with 
good reputation. 

Seed sowing 
Store at 0-5
o
c and at 50% or lower relative humidity.  
Poor storage in warm & humid areas lead to loss of viability 
Plant on nursery beds or in individual containers. 
As a guide: 
Depth: 2 to 3 times the diameter and cover firmly with soil. 
Keep the soil moist not wet until germination 
Too much wet conditions damping off (a soil-borne fungal disease 
which kills seedlings before or just after they emerge) may result 
Avoid complete dry conditions during germination period 
Lightly fertilize the seedlings every 2 wks after they have formed true 
leaves 
Watch for diseases and insect pests. 
 

Seed treatment for germination: 
Scarification: the scraping of the seed coat to 
help water penetration.  
Stratification: the process of chilling seeds 
under moist conditions at temperatures 
slightly above freezing. Suitable for many 
temperate tree fruit species. 

Asexual propagation 
This involves the use of plant parts for 
propagation other than seeds. It may involve 
direct use of the plant part e.g. cuttings, bulbs or 
indirectly through grafting or budding. 
 
Advantages: 
Fruit bearing starts earlier than seedling trees. 
True  to type seedlings  
Possible to produce species that do not have viable/ 
sufficient  seed 
Possible to regulate the tree size and fruit quality 

Disadvantages: 
Labour intensive and often expensive 
Often needs specialized equipment and skills 
Possibility of narrowing the genetic base of a 
species (The same genetics is maintained)  
Shallow root systems for some crops and prone to 
wind damage 
High chances of transmitting systemic diseases 
like viruses (banana bunchy top)  
 
 

Asexual propagation techniques 
Apomictic seeds  
Seed produced through parthernocarpy 
Commonly  in citrus and mangoes  
Parthernocarpy: a process where seeds are 
formed not as a result from pollination but rather 
are formed from the ovary tissue of the mother 
plant a process  
Plants from these seeds are genetically identical 
to the mother plant and are called apomictic 
seedlings while the embryos having such a trait is 
referred to as a nucellar embryo.  
 
 

Disadvantages of apomictic seeds: 
It is often difficult to distinguish between 
seedlings growing from apomictic seeds and those 
growing from sexually-produced seed. 
Plants grown from seed,( including apomictic 
seed) often take long to bear fruit (i.e. six to eight 
years ) since they remain in a juvenile and non-
fruiting phase until a long period to allow the 
development of productive cells.  
 

Cuttings 
 Propagation by rooting of individual plant 
parts, such as portions of stems, roots and 
leaves.  
New plants are identical to the parent . 
 Ensures huge amount of planting materials 
within short period of time. 
 
 

Types of cuttings 
Softwood cuttings:  cuttings taken from stock plants while the plants 
are growing most rapidly and stems are succulent. 
 
Preparation  
collected early in the morning when the stems are filled with water 
and while the air is cool. 
Remove the cuttings by breaking them from the plant at length 7-
10cm.  
Reduce the cuttings to uniform size 
Remove lower third of the leaves to avoid rotting of the foliage 
immersed in the propagation medium.  
Coating the base of the stem into rooting hormones. 
Insertion of cutting in the rooting medium. 
 
 
 

 

Semi hardwood cuttings/green wood cuttings 
The cuttings taken after first flush of active 
growth has ceased when the stems have not 
fully become woody. 
 

Hardwood cuttings: cuttings whose entire length 
has become lignified or woody.  
Taken after the leaves have dropped in deciduous 
fruit trees (dormant season) 
The cuttings are generally placed in moist sand or 
peat at 0.6
o
C during winter. 
This treatment allows the cut ends to heal or 
form callus tissue which will root so rapidly. 
The cuttings are then placed directly in the 
nursery beds or in fields to root and form new 
roots. 
The bottom part of the cutting is cut flat while 
the top part is cut in a sloping manner 
  
 
 

Rooting hormones are applied to facilitate 
quick rooting on cuttings e.g. naphthalene 
acetic acid (NAA) or indolebutyric acid (IBA).  
Applied as a solution (where lower portion of 
cut stem is soaked) or dry powder (cut are 
dipped) 
Fungicides can be used as well with rooting 
hormones to avoid any possible fungal 
infection.  
 

Layering 
•This involves rooting of the plant branches 
while still attached to the parent plant.  
•The stock plant continues providing nutrients 
and moisture to the branch while roots are 
forming.  
•This method is commonly done to plants that 
are considered as difficult-to-root.  

The main types of layering include: 
 
Simple/Trench layering 
For plants whose lower branches can be bent 
to contact the soil without breaking. 
The stems are bent to the ground and a 
section of bark and phloem of the lower 
surface of the stem is removed.  
This part of the stem is then covered until 
rooting occurs.  
Once proper rooting has occurred the layered 
plants are dug ready for planting. 
 
 



Air layering 
This is where a branch from tall trees are girdled (notched)  
Apply moist friable planting media comprising soil, sand and 
compost covered in a perforated plastic sheet.   
Once the roots have developed, the stem is detached from 
the parent plant and planted.  
 
The process of wounding or girdling the stems which are to be 
layered prevents the movement of sugars and auxin from 
the top portions of the plant to the base, and they 
accumulate just above the wound or girdled stem section.  
The presence of sugars and auxin encourages the formation of 
roots at this point. 
Rooting hormones can also be applied to the girdled section of 
stem. 



Mound layering 
Soil  is mounded over the base of the shrubby 
plant and roots are allowed to form.  
After rooting branches are cut off and planted 
and new branches are allowed to form on the 
mother plant.  
For mound layering of a single-stemmed plant 
the process is slightly different  
The plant is cut off 3cm above the ground to force 
it to produce several new shoots.  
After the shoots are 8 to 12cm tall, the plant is 
mounded with soil and when the shoots have 
rooted they are cut from the parent plant. 
 
 
 



Grafting and budding 
These methods are used especially for plant that 
produces great variations to parent plant once 
the seed is used for planting or the plant does not 
readily produce roots from cuttings.  
The other reasons for using grafting/budding: 
The use of winter-hardy roots on desired plants 
to extend their range of growth 
The use of disease or insect-resistant roots on 
desired cultivars to reduce losses in the landscape 
To help in creating dwarf crops that can withstand 
lodging 
Changing varieties of plants  

Grafting 
Scion 
 
 
 
 
Rootstock 

Splice 
Simplest 
Same thickness (rootstock &  scion) 
Good matching of cambium  
Procedure  
Make a sloping clean cut of the same length 
on both the rootstock and the scion 
Join the two parts and wrap the union with 
grafting tape 

Whip/splice grafting 

 
Whip-and-tongue 
 
•This method is used mainly to join a hardy or 
dwarfing tree rootstock with a desired scion 
cultivar. 
Procedure  
•Select two plants parts (rootstock and scion) of 
equal size and should be about 2cm in diameter.  
•Make an equal sloping cut on the two parts 
selected 
•Make the second downward cut starting from 
one third of the first cut. 
•Join the two parts, tongues interlocking and 
cambium layers matching. 
•Tie the union with grafting tape 
 

Whip and tongue grafting 

Approach grafting  
Two plants with their own root system. 
Remove the thin layer of the bark on two plants 
to be joined to expose cambium. 
Join the two plants on the point of cuts 
Tie the union with grafting tape 
After healing separate the scion from cutting 
below the graft union. 
Separate the rootstock by cutting above the graft 
union. 
 
 

Approach grafting  

Cleft grafting 
Used on mature plants which are to be 
changed to a different cultivar.  
By using this technique one can for example 
change a poor-quality mature peach tree to an 
improved cultivar.  
A tree changed by this method is said to have 
been top worked. 
 
 

Procedure  
Split the stub of a cut branch (5-8 cm depth) 
Prepare the scion: cut  the base into a long 
gradually tapering wedge (outside edge thicker 
than inside edge) 
Split the stock with the wedge to hold it open 
Insert the scions at the edges of the split making 
sure that the cambium layers are matching 
Withdraw the wedge 
 
Paint or apply wax on the entire union 
 



Wedge grafting 

Budding 
Budding is an adaptation of grafting where the 
scion consists of a single bud.  
Most budding techniques are easy and if done 
properly the chance of success is high.  
 
 
 

Techniques of budding 
T-budding and inverted T-budding are the 
most common techniques; however they can 
be done only when the bark is slipping.  
Chip budding is less commonly done, but 
dormant plants can be chip budded. 

T-budding technique 
Scion 

T-Budding Technique 

T-Budding Technique 









Inverted T-budding 

 
T-budding and inverted T-budding 
 
In T-budding: 
Make a vertical cut (2cm in length) through the bark to 
the cambium & a small crosswise cut is done at the top  
The flaps formed by the cuts can be readily separated 
from the underlying xylem. 
The bud (scion) is removed from the mother plant by 
making a cross-cut slightly above the bud  
Slice beneath the bud until the original cross-cut is 
reached then from a point just below the bud 
The resulting sliver of bark containing the bud is inserted 
under the bark flaps already prepared in the rootstock so 
that the straight sides on the top of both the scion and 
rootstock touch.  
The area is then wrapped with a budding tape but the 
bud is left showing. After the bud has healed, the top of 
the stock is cut off just above the bud, thus forcing the 
new bud to grow. 
 
 
 
 

Inverted T-technique: used in the tropics  
Make a vertical cut (2cm in length) through the bark to the 
cambium and a small crosswise cut is done at the bottom. 
The flaps formed by the cuts can be readily separated from 
the underlying xylem. 
The bud (scion) is removed from the mother plant by making 
a cross-cut slightly below the bud.  
Slice beneath the bud until the original cross-cut is reached 
from a point just above the bud. 
The resulting sliver of bark containing the bud is inserted 
under the bark flaps already prepared in the rootstock so 
that the straight sides on the bottom of both the scion and 
rootstock touch.  
The area is then wrapped with a budding tape but the bud is 
left showing. After the bud has healed, the top of the stock 
is cut off just above the bud, thus forcing the new bud to 
grow. 
 

Chip budding 

Chip budding 
Chip budding is more difficult than T-budding 
A 45
0
 angle downward cut is made in the scion just above a 
bud.  
An inward cut is then made just below the bud to meet the 
first cut and remove a 'chip' of wood containing the bud 
Identical cuts are made in the stock and the chip is inserted 
so that the cambium layers match.  
The bud area is then wrapped with the bud left exposed.  
After healing, the top of the stock is cut off to force the bud 
into growth. 
 

Suckers 
Common in herbaceous fruit trees.  
It involves the use of high vigour suckers to ensure quick shooting. 
 In bananas, the method has proved more effective and probably the simplest than 
micro-propagation as is the case with tissue culture.  
 
Types of suckers in banana fruits are in three categories: 
Sword suckers: those having narrow, sword-like leaves with a corm of about 12cm 
in diameter. They are considered as the best planting material due to their vigour. 
 
Maiden suckers: these are big suckers which are about to flower and are more 
than 1.5m tall. Can still be used as planting material in absence of sword sucker 
 
Water suckers: small suckers with broad leaves and very small corm. Not 
recommended for planting.  

TISSUE CULTURE 

Tissue culture 
•Often called micropropagation technique 
•very small plant parts - sterile conditions & 
controlled environments 
•Requires a TCL, special NM ka Murashige and 
skoog 
 

TISSUE CULTURED PLANTING 
MATERIALS 

Nutrient medium composition 
•Macronutrients: N,P, K, Mg, Ca, S 
•Microelements: Fe, B, Molybdenum and 
Copper 
•Sugar-carbon source e.g sucrose 
•Vitamins: thiamin(B1), ascorbic acid (C) 
•Growth regulators/ hormones: auxin (root), 
cytokinin (shoot) 
•Gelling agent (agar) 

Tissue culture lab facility 
•Preparation room: media preparation, 
sterilization, storage of chemicals 
•Transfer /inoculation room: laminar air flow 
hood, surgical tools, microscope 
•Incubation chamber: shelves, controlled 
lighting and temperature 

PREPARATORY ROOM 

INOCULATION ROOM 

INCUBATION CHAMBER 

The process 
collection of tissues 
 Media formulation       sterilization       transfer 
                                                                   incubation 
                                                                   plantlets 
              acclimatization     hardening off 
 
Seedlings ready for planting 

END 
 

CITRUS FRUIT  
PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
Lecture 12 

CITRUS FRUITS 
Family: Rutaceae 
Subtropical, evergreen plants 
originating in Southeast Asia 
Importance  
Food; eaten fresh & processed 
(juice,  soft drinks, jam & 
marmalade) 
Source of vitamin C 
Source of oil (skin) used in 
pharmaceutical industries 
Income  
 
 

Citrus species 
Citrus sinensis  - Sweet orange 
Citrus reticulata - Naartjies, Tangerine 
(Mandarin) 
Citrus limon  - Lemon 
Citrus paradisi  - Grape fruit 
Citrus aurantium - Sour or Seville orange 
Citrus aurantifolia - Lime 
Citrus grandis   - Shaddock (Pomelo) 
 

Cultivars 
Determined by: 
Area  
Common preference 
Export or processing requirements 

Cultivars  
# Citrus Fruit Varieties Altitude 
1 Oranges Valencia Late, Washington Navel, 
Hamlin, Pineapple 
Low or High 
altitude 
2 
Lemon Eureka, Villa Franca High altitude 
3 
Grape Fruit Marsh seedless, Redblush Duncan High altitude 
4 
Naartjies Cape High altitude 
6 
Tangerine Mwanza Local, Empress Mandarin High altitude 
7 
Lime Tahiti, West Indian (for oil processing) Low altitude 
8 
Sour Orange Bitter Serville (for marmalade) Low or High 
altitude 
9 
Shaddock Kao Lan, Pandan Wangi (the largest 
citrus fruit) 
Low or High 
altitude 



Rootstocks 
Requirements 
Good union with the main cultivar 
Ability to grow on various soils 
Tolerance to drought 
Tolerance to virus, fungus and nematodes 
 High degree of polyembryony (occurrence of 
more than one embryo in a seed).                                                                                                
 

Recommended citrus rootstocks 
Rootstock Characteristic 
Rough 
lemon 
Adapts to different soil types, resistant to tristeza virus, 
universally used in Malawi, poor quality fruits produced. 
Sour 
orange 
Resistant to Gummosis, susceptible to Tristeza virus, 
Produces fruits of high quality, thin skinned and juicy.  
A good rootstock for lemons, grape fruit and sweet 
oranges where Tristeza is not a problem. 
Sweet 
orange 
Shallow rooted and suited only to well-drained rich soils. 
Resistant to Tristeza but susceptible to Gummosis. 
Trifoliate 
orange 
More tolerant to cold weather, but susceptible to 
exocurtis. Resistant to Gummosis, tolerant to Tristeza and 
waterlogged areas conditions. Produces dwarf early 
bearing tree. 

 
Morphology 
 
Stem 
Small trees or young twigs are angled in 
shape, green color and then become 
cylindrical and dark brown when mature. 
Spines at leaf axils of young twigs and seedling 
trees.  
Older branches and budded trees are often 
spineless. 
Seedling trees are upright but budded trees 
are more spreading in growth. 
 

Leaf 
Have transparent oil glands, with distinctive smell. 
Ever green; one leaf can stay on the trees for about 
3 to 4 years. 
Unfoliolate compound leaf type wired petiole with 
the leaflet making articulations. 
Shape used to identify citrus cultivars. 
 

Flower 
All citrus flowers have sweet smell at anthesis. 
The color is white but lemons are purplish. 
The inflorescences occur at leaf axil or at the 
end of a branch. They are single like in grape 
fruit or racemes as in sweet orange. 
 

Fruit 
Sizes variable. They range from 150 grams (lime) to 
1.5 kilograms (shaddock). 
Some citrus fruits are formed by parthenocarpy. 
The peel has oil glands, yellow or orange color. 
There are 8 to 12 segments of spindle-shaped juice 
sacs that are covered by albedos. 
  

Seed 
Citrus seed is polyembryonic, one seed may contain 
many embryos. Nucellar embryo is the same 
genotype as the mother plant 
 

 
ECOLOGICAL REQUIREMENTS 
 
Climate 
Temperature 
Differ from cultivar to cultivar 
Optimum temp is 25
o
C to 30
o
C but the max and min 
temps can be 30
o
C and 13
o
C, respectively. 
Rainfall: 1, 000 and 1, 400 mm  
  
 

Soil 
Different soil types 
Well-drained and aerated soils  
Organic matter application is helpful on clay soils.  
Irrigation in the dry season is also important when 
growing on sandy soils. 
The best pH value is 5 – 6. 

 
RAISING SEEDLINGS 
 
Seed Preparation 
Select fruits from healthy mother plants for 
rootstocks.  
Extracted from mature fruits 
Sowing the seeds when they are still fresh is 
necessary.  

Citrus seeds will lose their viability rapidly. 
Keeping fresh citrus seeds in moist sawdust, sand or 
charcoal at 10
O
C can store the seeds for 2 weeks. 
Hot water treatment at 52
o
C for 10 minutes is 
required for disinfection 
Seeds planted in pots or on a seedbed 

 
Seedbed Preparation and Sowing 
 
Plough and harrow to 10 cm deep. Make the 
surface fine and level. 
Raised beds used (1.2 m wide and 15 cm high) 
Sow in drills across the beds (spacing 15 cm x 5 cm) 
Cover the seeds with sand 
Uniform germination would be obtained. 
  

 
Management of seedlings 
 
Germination: 25 – 35 days after sowing. 
Mulching and shading 
Water the beds twice a day. 
Liquid fertilizer (Nitrogen) application depends on 
the condition of growth (2 – 4 times in 2 months). 
Shade the beds in the early stages of growth 
especially later in the day. 
 

 
Transplanting to the Nursery Beds 
and pricking out 
 
Three months after sowing (10 – 15 cm high) 
Select normal and healthy seedlings; transplant 
them to the nursery beds (spacing 50 cm x 30 cm) 
OR 
The seedlings can be pricked out to polyethylene 
pots  or other suitable individual containers 
 

Weed Control 
Essential at both the seedbeds and nursery 
beds. 
Budding 
9 months after transplanting or 12 months 
after sowing 
The seedlings are big enough for budding. 
Another 12 months after budding, the 
seedlings are ready for planting to an orchard. 
 

PLANTING in the orchard 
The spacing depends on cultivar and 
cultivation system.  
Grape fruit trees are more spreading than 
orange, it therefore needs wider spacing.  
e.g. 
Grape Fruit  6m x 6m - 7.3m x 7.3m 
Oranges, Lemons 5.5m x 5.5m – 7.3m x 
7.3m 
Lime, Naartjies 4.6m x 4.6m – 5.5m x 
5.5m 
 

 
ORCHARD MANAGEMENT  
 
Basin making: basin around fruit tree 
Cultivation/weeding: Shallow hoeing must be 
practiced when weeding. Keep the basin weed 
free. Weeds outside the basin area should be 
kept short by slashing.  
Irrigation: to avoid flower and fruit abortion 
(dropping) 
 
 

 
Fertilizer Application 
 
At juvenile stage, it is done every 3 months and 
during the fruit bearing stage, twice a year. 
Age (years)  CAN  SSP   MP 
0    225g  -  - 
1    450g  112g  112g 
2    675g  225g  225g 
3    900g  225g  225g 
4-5            1125g 225g  225g 

Fruit bearing 
Age (years) CAN  SSP  MP 
6 -10   1.4 kg 340g  450g 
11 -15  1.8 kg 675g  675g 
12-25  2.7 kg 675g  675g 
26-35  3.6 kg 900g  900g 
36 +   4.5 kg 1125g 1125g 
 

Fertilizer Application 
Time of Application;  
2/3 of the Nitrogen, all the Potash and all the 
Phosphate should be applied in June.  
The remaining N fertilizer should be applied in 
Nov.  
Compost application every year is beneficial. 

 
Pruning 
 
Good shape (juvenile stage)  
To maintain the height which is used for easy 
harvesting (Lemons) 
On fruit bearing trees, only the general 
pruning is done in May/June. 
 
 
 

 
PESTS AND DISEASES 
 
PESTS 
Citrus Aphid (Toxoptera citrucidus) 
Clusters of small black or brown-bodied 
insects are found under leaves and young 
shoots.  
Suck plant sap and cause distortion of leaves.  
Honey dew (a sticky liquid produced by the 
aphids) and sooty mould is often present. 
Vectors (carry virus) 
 

Control 
Spray with Malathion, Rogor E40 or Diazinon. 
  
 
 

Scale Insects 
Small, flat, scale-like insects with no visible 
legs, which attach themselves firmly to the 
leaves, branches and fruit.  
Often associated with honey dew, black, sooty 
mould; ants may be present. 
Control 
Malathion and white oil. 
Diazinon and white oil. 

Mites 
Tiny insect of various types.  
Attack the growing shoots, twigs, leaves and 
flower buds become deformed.  
Fruits are also affected. 
 
Control 
As soon as signs of attack are seen, spray with 
Dicofol, Rogor E40 or Sulphur. 
 

Fruit Fly (Ceratitis capitata) 
Adult lays eggs on the fruit 
When the  larvae hatches the skin of the fruit 
turns to brown.  
If unripe fruit is infested it may fall off before 
it is ready. 

Control 
Spray a poison bait onto to the fruit trees every 
week. The bait should be from; 
Malathion 25% WP - 35 grams 
or Dipteran 50% WP - 20 grams 
Water    - 20 litres 
Sugar    - 1.4 kgs 
Field hygiene; collect and bury fallen fruits twice 
a week. 
  
 

False Codling Moth (Cryptophebia leucotreta) 
Adult lay eggs on the fruit 
when the caterpillars hatch out they bore into 
the pulp.  
A yellow patch can be seen on the skin of the 
fruit where the caterpillars have entered. 
 
Control 
Spray with Malathion or Labyacid. 
Field hygiene; pick all infested fruits. 
 
 
 

Orange Dog (Papilio demodocus) 
Very serious pest of citrus fruits.  
The adult is a butterfly which lays eggs on the 
citrus leaves.  
The eggs hatch into a caterpillar which often 
causes serious damage by eating the leaves. 
The caterpillar looks like bird’s droppings in 
the early stage but turns pale green with 
brown markings later.  

Control 
If there are not too many caterpillars remove 
them by hand and kill them.  
Spray with Labyacid, Malathion or Diazinon on 
heavily infested trees. 
 

 
DISEASES 
 
Armillaria Root Rot (Armillaria mellea) 
Symptoms 
Yellowing of the foliage, defoilation and 
dieback (Whole tree declines slowly and 
eventually dies)  
Later stages, cracks on the bark at the base of 
the tree and white sheets of fungus between 
the bark and the wood. 

Control 
Carefully clean all woody vegetation before 
planting and ring bark the trees.  
Dig a trench around infected tree to prevent 
the spread.  
 

Gummosis, Root Rot (Phytophthora 
citriphthora) 
Caused soil inhabiting fungus 
Attacks  the bark of the tree above and below 
the ground.  
Likely to be serious or poorly drained soils. 
Symptoms 
Dark water soaked appearance of bark 
accompanied by gum exudation. 

Control 
Use of resistant rootstocks and care in 
irrigation and drainage can control the 
disease. 
 
 
 

 
Virus Diseases 
 
Tristeza 
Spread by citrus aphid.  
Gumming  of the bud union  
Subsequent quick decline of the tree 
Only serious where sweet oranges are budded on sour 
orange stock. 
Exocortis 
Stunting of the trees 
Not found in trees growing on rough lemon stocks 
May become serious in trees growing on trifoliate orange 
stocks.  
Spread by using infected bud wood  

Greening 
The disease is transmitted by an insect, citrus psylla, 
which resembles a winged aphid. It will jump when 
disturbed. 
Fruit on diseases trees remain small and drops early, 
it is of poor quality and a bitter flavour. 
Severely affected trees are stunted, sparsely foliated 
and often show considerable die back. 
Leaf symptoms are similar to those of certain mineral 
deficiencies.  
 
 
 
 
 

Controlling virus diseases 
•Remove infected trees  
•Disinfect pruning tools 
•Use clean planting materials  
 

 
HARVESTING 
 
The first economic yield (5 – 6 yrs after 
planting) 
Harvested when they are mature.  
The colour may change or remain green. 
 

HARVESTING 
Method 
Hold the fruit and cut the stalk to the shoulder 
with a snub-nosed scissors.  
Don’t pull the fruit when harvesting. Any 
damage can cause fungal infection the fruits 
deteriorate rapidly.  
Don’t harvest fruits in rainy days or when 
fruits are wet. 
Lining the containers and handling with care 
are important to avoid bruising the fruit. 

End 
 

BANANA PRODUCTION 
BY 
Andrew Thadzi 
LUANAR-NRC 
Campus 
Lecture 13 

BANANA PRODUCTION 
Family : Musaceae 
Botanical name: 
Banana-  Musa sapentium 
Plantain- Musa paradisiaca  
These are herbaceous plants of the genus Musa widely grown 
in the tropics 
Banana 
A sweet fruit often eaten raw as dessert when ripe 
Plantain  
Has more starch and is usually cooked and eaten as a staple 
food in some parts Africa including Malawi.  
 
The chopped pseudostem and flower buds are supplementary 
feed to animals. 
 
 

Cultivars  
Bananas 
The common cultivars include: Dwarf Cavendish 
(Kabuthu), Giant William, Giant Cavendish 
Mulanje, Katsinzi, Magombo, Nyanga za insa, 
Kholobowa, Zomba Red and Zambia. 
  
Plantains 
Two known cultivars include;  
Ngewo (Khazanga)  
Ndoki (Zeru) 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
   
 
 
Plant morphology   
 
Root 
Fleshy adventitious roots of about 5-8cm thick and 
75-140cm long.  
Found on shallow surface about 15cm-40cm of 
the top soil layer. 
 
Stem 
True stem is underground (Corm) 
where the leaves are attached and produces the 
axil buds known as suckers at later stage. 
False stem/Pseudo-stem is the aerial trunk since it 
is made of tightly clasped leaf sheaths. 
 

Leaves 
Have a U-petiole and the leaf blade (lamina) is 
oval with sizes of about 1.5 – 5m long and 70 – 
100cm wide. 
 
Flowers 
The inflorescence is from a transformed growing 
point in the heart of the plant.  
Parts 
Axis (rachis) on which the individual flowers 
are borne and attach on the nodes 

Bract: a cover on each node, protects the flower 
cluster, open and drop as fruits develop 
Flower cluster: has12-22 flowers, found on each 
node of the axis. The first node may have 28 
flowers. These flowers are categorized as follows: 
Female flowers (pistillate flower): first 5-15 
clusters. They have large ovary which may 
develop fruit without pollination or fertilization 
(parthenocarpy) 
Neutral flowers- occur below the female 
flowers and normally are abortive ovary flowers 
Male flowers (staminate)- occur after the 
neutral flowers. They normally drop off after 
anthesis.   
 
 



Fruit: fruit is described into bunch, hand and finger. 
A bunch may have 5-11 hands and each hand may 
12-28fingers. 
 
 
 

 
 
 Climate and Soil requirements 
Climate 
It a tropical crop 
Temperature range of 27 – 38
o
C.  
Good rainfall of about 800 – 2000mm- evenly distributed 
throughout the year.  
Dry season: irrigation is essential to prolong the growth 
In areas of strong winds, windbreaks will be needed since 
it is a shallow rooted crop. 
 
Soil 
Wide range of soils so long as the clay content is below 
40% with good depth.  
Well drained and having good fertility.  
pH value 6.0 – 7.5.  
 

 
 
 Propagation 
Vegetative propagation 
Suckers 
Corm 
Tissue culture.  
Types of suckers: 
Sword suckers 
Having narrow, sword-like leaves with a corm of 
about 12cm in diameter. They are considered as the 
best planting material due to their vigour. 
 
Maiden suckers 
Big suckers which are about to flower and are 
more than 1.5m tall 
  

Water suckers 
Small suckers with broad leaves. Not good for 
planting.  
  
 

A corm  
Preparation 
cutting back the pseudo-stem to 20 – 30cm 
trim the roots 
disinfect the corm using fungicides or  hot water 
treatment at 62 – 65
O
C for 15minutes to reduce 
nematodes and fungi. 
 

Spacing  
Vary depending on the cultivar.  
Dwarf types like Dwarf Cavendish (Kabuthu) use 
2m x 2m or 3.3m x 3.3m.  
Taller cultivars like Giant Williams use 3m x 3m or 
3.5m x 3.5m 
 
The planting hole 
Diameter 60cm and 90cm deep. 
The best planting time is during rainy season and 
in Malawi is this around December to January. 
When the soil are still moist. 
 
 
 
Planting 

Basin making/ box ridges 
Mulching 
Weeding  
Fertilizer application 
Rapid growth rate makes bananas heavy 
feeders 
Broadcast evenly at least 50cm away from the 
planting station OR 
Make a shallow ring or circular groove 1m 
away from the base of the plant 
Do not allow fertilizer to come in contact with 
the trunk 
 
 
 
ORCHARD MANAGEMENT 

Apply twice a year i.e. at the beginning of rains 
(November/December) and second application 
towards the end of the rains in March.  
Each time apply 200g CAN, 250g SSP, and 
175g Muriate of potash.  
Banana requires more potash for strong 
pseudo-stem and also enrich sweetness of the 
fruits. 
Mulch the station after applying by a layer of 
grass or compost. 
 
 
 
 
 

Pruning of suckers/ Desuckering 
To maintain appropriate plant density 
To provide space for bigger bunches of good 
quality. (reduces competition for water light 
and nutrients and gives a higher yield) 
Eliminate suckers that are poorly positioned, 
too small and unhealthy 
Usually leave three plants per station 
•one at fruit bearing (mother),  
•the other one at almost half the height of the 
mother (daughter)  
•the other one at a stage of newly shooting 
sucker (grand daughter). 
Using the rotating method when pruning to 
maintain the original stations. 
 

Leaf pruning 
Old diseased and dead hanging leaves should 
be removed using a sharp knife soon after 
planting 
Dead hanging leaves cover young suckers  
Old sheaths at the base of the pseudostem 
provide a home for adult weevil  
 
 
 

Propping 
To support the plant from strong winds 
To prevent plants with heavy maturing 
bunches from breaking or toppling  
Wooden pegs, poles  or ropes can be used 
 
 
 
 

Deflowering 
Male flowers are cut at the flower rachis at the 
node of neutral flowers to avoid wastage of plant 
nutrients. 
 
 
 
 

Bagging 
The plastic bag or paper is used to cover the 
bunch when the last hand starts developing 
and fingers are turning upwards.  
Protects the fruit from cold, dust, sunburn, 
chemical residuals, insects, birds and cigar-
end tip rot disease. 
It advances ripening 
Prevents scratching or bruising during 
harvesting 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 

Pest and Disease Control 
 
Pests 
Banana weevil (Cosmopolites sordidus) 
brown to black beetle of about 12-14mm long 
with pronounced snot.  
The adult feeds on the plant especially 
pseudo-stem during night and lay eggs in the 
upper of the corm causing lodging of stems 
and die prematurely  
Control  
ApplyAldrin and Dieldrin at the base of the 
station 
Spray Chlordane or parathion 
Practice field hygiene. 
  

Nematodes (root-knot nematodes). 
These are slender eel worms of 0.68mm long 
causing dark lesions and galls on the roots.  
The corm has black-brown lesions and the 
leaves turn yellow and wilts eventually. 
 
Control 
Treating the planting material 
Practice rotation for every five-year period. 
 
 
 
 

Diseases 
 
Leaf spot (Black sigatoka) 
It is caused by a fungus called (Mycosphaerella 
muscola).  
 
Symptom 
Spot and patched lesions of brown-black on the 
leaves causing wilting and death of the infected 
leaves. 
 
Control 
Spraying fungicides such as copper-oxy-chloride. 
 
  
  
 

Panama Disease / Fusarium wilt 
(Fusarium oxysporum) 
It a fungal disease 
Attacks the vascular system of the plant 
through the roots.  
Symptoms  
Old leaves become yellow and may 
collapse at the petiole.  
The pseudo-stem may split vertically and 
the joint of the corm and the pseudo-stem 
turn black.  
Control  
Fumigation of the soil, 
Sterilising the tools with 5% phenol or 5% 
formaldehyde solution. 

Moko Disease  (bacterial wilt) 
It caused by bacteria 
Attacks the plant parts above the ground.  
 
Symptoms 
Yellowing of the inner leaf lamina close to the 
petiole.  
Lower leaves remain green but later on they turn 
whitish-yellow and then they dry and become flaccid.  
Control 
Pruning and field hygiene. 
  
 
 
 

Bunchy Top 
It virus disease transmitted by aphids.  
 
Symptoms  
green speckles on the secondary veins on the 
under side of lamina, mid-rib and petiole.  
Later the leaves become brittle and stunted 
forming a bunchy of leaves.  
 
Control 
Remove and burning of the infected plants.     
  
  
  
  
 
 
 
 

Cigar-end-rot 
Caused by a fungus Venticillum theobromas.  
 
Symptoms 
Attacks the flowers and the infection may slowly 
spread along the finger and cigar-ash like stuff will 
appear at the end of the fruit.  
 
Control 
Spraying fungicides before bagging. 
  
  
  
 
 
 
 

Harvesting  
Bananas are considered mature when fruit fingers 
are fully developed and ridges become flat.  
The colour turns from dark green to light or pale 
green.  
Immature fruit susceptible to shrivelling, 
mechanical damage, and poor eating quality when 
cooked 
Over mature or Ripened fruits not good for export 
market 
 
 
  
  
  
  
  
 

Method of harvesting 
Make a cut using a panga knife in the 
pseudostem 
Allow the bunch to descend slowly under its 
own weight 
Make every effort to prevent the bunch from 
hitting the ground 
Fruits bruised during harvesting have a shorter 
post harvest life, ripens quickly and have poor 
eating quality. 
 

End 