

10/2/2025
1
Topic 2: Classification of Agricultural Markets 
Lesson Structure:
Understanding Agricultural Markets
Classification of Agricultural Markets
Market Structures
Characterisation of Market Structures
33
Markets...
Market
A market exists when a group of consumers (buyers) willing & able to
exchange money for a product (good/ service) agrees with sellers of
products to exchange products (goods/services) for money.
Other Definition:
Aggregate demand of potential buyers for a particular product
(good/services).
34

10/2/2025
2
Markets...
Components of a Market
For a market to exist, certain conditions must be satisfied.
Existence of a product (goods/services),
Existence of buyers and sellers,
Price at which the product is exchanged, and
Business relationship or interaction between buyers and sellers.
35
Classification of Markets
On the Basis of Location or Place of Operation
a) Village Market:Located in a small village, where buyers and sellers
normally reside in that village
b) Urban Markets:Located in towns near the centres of production of
agricultural commodities.
c) Central Markets:located generally at district headquarters or
important trading centres
d) Terminal Markets:
Located where the products are either finally disposed off to consumers or
processors, or assembled for export.
Located either in metropolitan cities or at seaports.
36

10/2/2025
3
Classification of Markets...
On the Basis of Area/Coverage:
a) Local:A market confined within a village or group of villages.
b) Regional Markets:A market which covers a larger area (e.g. food grain market
in central region of Malawi)
c) National Markets:A market which covers an entire nation (e.g. Tobacco
Marketing)
d) World or International Market:
A market in which buyers and sellers are drawn from more than one country
Exist for commodities which have a world-wide demand and/or supply (e.g. fuel, coffee, tea,
sugar, machinery).
37
Classification of Markets...
On the Basis of Time Span:
a) Short period Markets:
Held only for a day or few hours
The products dealt with are of a highly perishable nature, such as fish, fresh
vegetables, and liquid milk.
b) Periodic Markets:
Congregation of buyers and sellers takes place at specified places either in
villages, semi-urban areas or some parts of urban areas on specific days and time.
c) Long-period Markets:
Held for a longer period than the short-period markets.
Commodities traded are less perishable and can be stored for some time; like
food grains and oilseeds.
38

10/2/2025
4
Classification of Markets...
On the Basis of Volumes of Transactions
Wholesale Markets:
One in which commodities are bought and sold in large lots or in bulk.
Retail Markets:
A retail market is one in which commodities are bought from wholesalers and
sold in small lots to consumers
Distinction between wholesale and retail markets can be made mainly on the
basis of buyer.
In a retail market buyers are generally ultimate consumers, whereas in the
wholesale market buyers can be wholesalers or retailers. But sometimes-bulk
consumers also purchase from the wholesale markets.
Quantity transacted in retail markets is generally smaller than in wholesale
markets.
39
Classification of Markets...
On the Basis of Nature of Commodities transacted:
a) General Markets:
All types of commodities, such as food-grains, oilseeds, fibre crops,., are
bought and sold
b) Specialized Markets:
A market in which transactions take place only in one or a few related
commodities is known as a specialized market.
Such as Tobacco Auction Floors, Tea markets.
40

10/2/2025
5
Classification of Markets...
On the Basis of Nature of Transactions
Spot or Cash Markets:A market in which goods are exchanged for money
immediately after a sale.
Forward Markets:A market in which purchase and sale agreement takes place
now but the actual exchange of the commodity takes place on some specified
date in future.
41
Classification of Markets...
On the Basis of Extent of Public Intervention
a) Regulated Markets:
These markets operate in accordance with specific rules and regulations framed
by Government institutions/agencies-
e.g. Tobacco Commission (TC) controls all tobacco marketing in Malawi
b) Unregulated Markets:
These are markets in which business is conducted without any set rules and
regulations(e.g. fish marketing in Malawi; illegal artisanal mining).
Traders themselves frame the rules for conducting business and running the
markets.
Imperfections are common in these markets, ranging from unstandardized charges
for marketing functions to imperfect determination of prices.
42

10/2/2025
6
Market Structures
Market Structure
Refers to organizational characteristics of a market which influence nature of
competition, conduct (behaviour) and performance of business firms (or
traders).
43
Market Structures...
Determination (Characterisation) of Market Structures.....is based on:
Concentration of Market Power
Measured by number and size of sellers/buyers existing in the market.
Determines nature of competition and market performance.
Extent of concentration represents control of an individual firm or a group of
firms over the buying and selling of the produce.
44

10/2/2025
7
Market structures: Determinants of Market Structure...
Degree of Product Differentiation
Nature of products affect market structure - homogeneous or
heterogeneous.
Homogeneous products do not significantly affect price variations of
products in the market.
Heterogeneous products-influence price variations.
Conditions for Market Entry & Exit
Are there stiff conditions for entry of firms (sellers/buyers) in the market?
Sometimes, a few big buyers/sellers will make it difficult for potential
buyers/sellers to enter the market
Government may also impose restrictions on entry of firms in certain
markets.
45
Market structures: Determinants of Market Structure...
Flow of Market Information
A well-organized market information system helps all market players (i.e.
buyers and sellers) to optimally interact with one another in arriving at
prices and striking deals.
Degree of Integration/Association
Behaviour of an integrated market will be different from that of a market
where there is no or less integration either among the firms or of their
activities.
Firms plan their strategies in respect of the methods to be employed in
determining prices, increasing sales, coordinating with competing firms
and adopting predatory practices against rivals or potential entrants.
46

10/2/2025
8
Market Structures...
Based on the 5 market determinants, markets are placed on a continuous
scale: from perfectly competitive (pure competition) to pure monopoly
(Imperfect competition).
Perfect/Pure Competition Market:
It’s a market where there are a large number of buyers and sellers;
All buyers and sellers have perfect information (about demand, supply and
prices);
There is free entry & exit of firms in the market
Products are homogeneous.
Imperfect Markets
Markets in which the conditions of perfect competition are lacking are
imperfect markets.
47
Market Structures...
Sub-Categories of Imperfect Markets:
Monopoly Market:
A market with only one seller of a product.
In this market the seller has absolute control over quantity and price of the product.
Price of the product is generally higher than in competitive markets
A market with one buyer is known as amonopsonymarket(e.g. the formal milk
market in Malawi)
Duopoly Market:
A market with only two sellers of a product/commodity(e.g. the Sugar Market in
Malawi).
It is easy for the two sellers to collude to charge a common price that would be
higher than in an ideal competitive market.
48

10/2/2025
9
Market structures...Sub-categories of Imperfect Markets
Oligopolistic Market:
It is a market that has more than two but still a few sellers of a product(e.g.
telecommunication market; banking sector).
A market having a few (more than two) buyers is known asoligopsony
market(e.g. tobacco market; cotton market; tea industry).
Monopolistic Competition Market:
It is a market that has many sellers, with each seller having heterogeneous
and differentiated products.
The difference is made conspicuous by different features on the product.
Different prices prevail for the same basic product.
Examples:agricultural markets, car industry, fashion/clothing industry.
49
Summary of Market Structures
Characteristic   Pure 
Competition
Monopolistic
Competition
OligopolyPure Monopoly
Number of firmsVery   large
number
Many differentiated   FewOne
Control over 
Price
NoneSomeLimited,  considerable
with collusion
Considerable
Conditions of 
market 
entry/Exit
Very easy; no
obstacles
Relatively easySignificantBlocked
Non-price
competition
NoneEmphasis   is   on
advertising,    brand
names & trade marks
A great deal, particularly
withproduct
differentiation
Advertising
Type of productStandardised.
E.g.
Agriculture
Differentiated.   E.g.
Shoes,    agricultural
chemicals
Standardisedor
differentiated. E.g. steel,
farm implements
Unique, no close
substitutes.   E.g.
localutilities
(electricity, water)
50