

Sustainable Agriculture
An introduction

The concept of sustainability
•Birthed from the concept of sustainable 
development
•In 1987, led by GroHarlem Brundtland, 
prime Minister of Norway, the WCED 
published its report “Our common 
future”, also known as “The Brundtland
report”,where the concept of 
sustainable development took course. 
•Sustainable development means the 
type of development that allows 
present generations to meet their 
needs, without compromising the ability 
of future generations to meet their 
needs.

•Sustainableagriculturemeansthetypeof
agriculturethatwillallowpresentgenerationsto
meettheirneedswithoutcompromisingthe
abilityoffuturegenerationstomeettheirown
needs.
•Itmeansanagriculturethatwillcontinueto
conservenaturalresourcesandprotectthe
environment,enhancepublichealthandsafety,
andproduceadequatequantitiesoffoodatthe
profitforthefarmers,promotionofsocialjustice
andsafeguardingthewelfareofanimals.
•Entailsthat,stewardshipofbothnaturaland
humanresources(includingconsiderationof
socialresponsibilitiessuchasworkingandliving
conditionsoflaborers,theneedsofrural
communities,andconsumerhealthandsafety)

Characteristics of sustainable agriculture

a. Environmentally sound
•Environmentally Sustainable 
Agriculture should be:
–Bearable
–Equitable 
–viable for the farmer 
•AND -produce the best quality 
food for the consumer, nurture 
the environment & preserve 
energy
Means that the quality of the environment and the vitality of the entire agro-ecosystem from humans, crops, 
animals to soil organisms are maintained without harming the environment. 

b. Economically viable
•Ecological economics is: –the interdependence of ‘human economies 
and natural ecosystems’. 
•It treats the economy and society as a subsystem of the ecosystem 
with emphasis on preserving natural capital 
•Recognizes –That social and economic systems cannot exist 
independently from the environment
•Entails that farmers should produce enough for self sufficiency, 
income and gain sufficient returns to warrant for labor and other 
costs involved

c. Socially just
•Resources and power are distributed so that the 
basic needs of the members of the society are 
met and their rights to land use, adequate 
capital, technical assistance and market 
opportunities are assured. 
•All people have the opportunity to participate in 
decision making in the field or in the society. 
d. Humane
•It means that all forms of life are respected. The 
fundamental dignity of the human beings is 
recognized. Relationships and institutions 
incorporate such basic human values as trust, 
self-respect, honesty cooperation and 
compassion. 

Adaptable
•Adaptability -ability to adjust your 
emotions, thoughts and behavior to 
changing situations and 
conditions(open to change, new 
ideas, challenges and approaches)
•Farmers should be capable of 
adjusting to the constantly changing 
conditions of farming e.g. drought, 
population growth and market 
demand. 
•This involves not only development of 
new appropriate technologies, but 
also innovations in social and cultural 
terms.

Profitability of sustainable agriculture
Sustainable agriculture is profitable, because its operations and productivity 
revolve around the maximum sustainable yield, where the quality of the 
resource base in the long run is preserved. Below are some of the ethics 
behind profitability of sustainable agriculture:
•Sustainable agriculture is a model of social and economic organization 
based on an equitable and participatory vision of development which 
recognizes the environment and natural resources as the foundation of 
economic activity. 
•Sustainable agriculture preserves biodiversity, maintains soil fertility and 
water purity, conserves and improves the chemical, physical and biological 
qualities of the soil, recycles natural resources and conserves energy.
•Sustainable agriculture produces diverse forms of high quality foods, fibers 
and medicines.

Profitability cont’
•Sustainable agriculture uses locally available renewable resources, 
appropriate and affordable technologies and minimizes the use of 
external and purchased inputs, thereby increasing local independence 
and self sufficiency and ensuring a source of stable income for rural 
communities. 
•Sustainable agriculture respects the ecological principles of diversity 
and interdependence and uses the insights of modern science to 
improve rather than displace indeginousknowledge.
•Sustainable agriculture entails keeping environmental impact below 
the level required to allow the systems affected to recover and 
continue to evolve. 

Sustainable agriculture practices
Adopting Agroforestry Practices.
Applying Integrated Pest Management (IPM).Farmers can 
usebiological and mechanical waysof keeping away unwanted animals 
and insects from their crops.
Adopting soil and water conservation measures.
Aquaponics and Hydroponics.Aquaponics is when people grow fish 
and vegetables in a mutually beneficial system of sharing water and 
nutrients.Hydroponicfarmers grow plants without using soil and 
instead use materials likeclay balls, coconut hair and fabric. 

Sustainable agriculture practices cont’
Food Forests. To create a food forest one grows food in vertical layers that mimic the layers of a forest.
Managed Grazing.Farmers who raise livestock such as cows can seek to reduce the animals’harm to the land 
on which they graze by limiting their access to the land.
Managing Whole Systems and Landscapes.Holistic 
approaches to farming are an Indigenous practice.
Permaculture is a set of ecological design principles 
and methods that scientists took from Indigenous 
communities.
Reducing or Eliminating Tillage.Farmers can allow 
the soil to stay intact and allow crop residue to 
protect it throughno-till farming.

Sustainable agriculture practices
Rotating Crops and Embracing Diversity.Crop rotation, or changing the 
type of crop you grow in the same location, helps growers manage pests, 
weeds, and soil health.
Integrating livestock and crops
Using Renewable Energy Resources.
Planting Cover Crops.Helps with erosion control, reduced compaction 
and nutrient leaching, increased water infiltration, improved soil 
biodiversity, weed control and disease suppression, increased capture of 
carbon in the soil, maximum nutrient recycling, improved air, soil and 
water quality, and wildlife diversity and enhancement. Cover crops can 
also help with pest management and soil fertility improvement.

Unsustainable agricultural practices
•Planting on unsuitable land like steep slopes, which leads to soil 
erosion.
•Shifting cultivation which leads to an imbalance between the area 
that is cleared and the assimilative capacity of the environment to 
abandoned areas.
•Mono-cropping, which leads to loss of biological diversity, promotion 
of pest population, disease transmission rate, pesticide application, 
production of genetically modified organisms, and application of 
supplementary nutrients that facilitate eutrophication.

Unsustainable agricultural practices
•Burning crop residues, which only leaves metals in the soil, but 
organic matter, nutrients, elements, microbes and other beneficial 
macro and micro flora and fauna get destroyed.
•Removing crop residues form the field, either as feed without 
bringing back manure, or using as energy, without replacing biomass 
utilized. Crop exportation means nutrient exporting.
•Making ridges along the slope.
•Excessive tillage, which leads to soil loosening and compaction.

Unsustainable agricultural practices
•Late planting, which increases pest and disease instances, leads to 
lack of cover and nutrients are not fully used.
•Late preparation of gardens-soil becomes so hard as such tilling leads 
to wind erosion.
•No cover crops.
•No trap crops e.g. stripping for control of pests and diseases.
•Application of inappropriate or too much fertilizer.
•Overgrazing-when stocking rate is higher than the carrying capacity of 
land or pasture, palatable species go first then unpalatable ones 
leading to ecosystem change and desertification.