

390 
 
Lilongwe University of Agriculture and Natural Resources 
 
 PROGRAMME          : Bachelor of Science in Applied Sciences 
 PRESENTED TO          : Senate 
 PRESENTED BY          : Faculty of Life Sciences and Natural Resources 
 SUBJECT              : Physics 
 YEAR OF STUDY         : 3 
 SEMESTER OF STUDY      : 1 
 COURSE TITLE          : Geophysics 
 COURSE CODE          : NGEP 33105 
 DURATION           : 16 Weeks 
 LECTURE HOURS PER WEEK  : 2  
 TUTORIAL HOURS PER WEEK: 1  
 PRACTICAL HOURS PER WEEK: 2  
 STUDENT INDEPENDENT LEARNING HOURS PER WEEK: 6    
 CREDIT HOURS         : 3.5  
 PREREQUISITE COURSES    : Physics III (Modern physics and Quantum     
mechanics) 
 COREQUISITE COURSE : None 
 DELIVERY METHODS 
 MODE OF DELIVERY        : Face-to-face and ODL 

391 
 TEACHING METHODS   :     Lectures,     tutorials,     and 
practicals/experiments 
 ASSESSMENT WEIGHTING : Continuous Assessment:   40%  
:  End of Semester Exam:  60% 
 AIM(S) OF THE COURSE 
To equip learners with knowledge of Geophysics to prepare them for industrial work 
and for further studies in related areas 
 
 LEARNING OUTCOMES 
Upon successful completion of this course, students should be able to:  
a. Discuss how earth's interior is inferred from geophysical methods. 
b. examine the forward and inverse geophysical modelling. 
c. State Newton's Universal law of gravity  
d. examine Anderson theory of faulting  
e. Explain the origin of earth's magnetic field. 
f. discuss how gravitational and magnetic field strength is measured. 
g. Solve geothermal problems. 
h. Explain how velocity models can be estimated using seismic refraction. 
 
 TOPICS OF STUDY 
 Lectures/Theory 
a. Introduction  
• The physical basis for geophysical properties, How Earth’s interior is inferred from 
geophysical methods, Forward and inverse geophysical modelling 
b. Tectonics on a sphere  
• Rotation vectors and rotation poles, Past and present-day plate motions, Plate 
boundaries and their evolution over time 
c. Gravity and geodesy  

392 
• Newton’s  Universal  Law  of  gravitation,  Gravitational  potential  and  Earth’s 
gravitational field, Geodesy and lithospheric flexure. 
d. Geomagnetism  
• Origin of Earth’s magnetic field. Magnetic potential and dipole field strength. Rock 
magnetism. Paleomagnetism and past plate motions. 
e. Applications of potential-field data  
• Instruments for measuring gravitational and magnetic field strength. Basic data 
processing. Forward modelling and inversion. 
f. Radioactivity and geochronology.  
• Nuclear  decay  and  radioactivity.  General  theory  for  radiometric  age  dating. 
Overview of geochronology methods. Age of the Earth.  
g. Terrestrial heat flow  
• Conductive  heat  flow.  Calculation  of  simple  geotherms.  Global  heat  flow, 
continents versus oceans. 
h. Applications of heat flow measurements  
• The  adiabatic  and  melting  in  the  mantle.  Metamorphism:  geotherms  in  the 
continental crust 
i. Deep interior of the Earth. Internal structure of the Earth. Convection in the 
mantle. Earth’s core. 
j. Seismic waves  
• Linear elasticity. Stress and strain. Basic principles of seismology: waves, rays, Snell’s 
law, Huygens’ Principle. Reflection and refraction. Surface and body waves. 
k. Earthquakes and global seismology  
• Anderson’s theory of faulting. Earthquake magnitude scales. Probing Earth’s deep 
interior using seismic waves. 
l. Applied seismology. Seismic reflection method  

393 
• data acquisition and basic processing. Seismic refraction method to estimate velocity 
models. 
  Practicals/Lab Topics 
h. Measuring  gravitational  and  magnetic  field  strength  using 
instruments. 
i. Processing and interpretation of potential-field data. 
j. Radiometric age dating and geochronology. 
k. Calculation of simple geotherms and global heat flow. 
l. Seismic wave propagation and Snell's law. 
m. Anderson's theory of faulting and earthquake magnitude scales. 
n. Seismic reflection and refraction methods for estimating velocity 
models. 
Equipment and materials: 
• Gravimeter and magnetometer for measuring field strength. 
• Computer and software for processing and interpretation of 
potential-field data. 
• Radioactive isotopes and detectors for radiometric age dating. 
• Thermometers and probes for measuring temperatures. 
• Seismic instruments for measuring wave propagation. 
• Seismic sources for generating waves. 
• Tectonic models and maps. 
• Lab  tools  such  as  glassware,  scales,  and  thermometers  for 
geothermal experiments. 
 
 PRESCRIBED TEXTS 
Lowrie, W. (1997) Fundamentals of Geophysics. Cambridge University Press 
Lowrie, W. (2007). Fundamentals of Geophysics, 2 Ed. Cambridge University Press.  

394 
Schon, J.H. (2004). Physical Properties of Rocks: Fundamentals and Principles of 
Petrophysics. Pergamon 
Stacey, F.D. and Davis P.M (2008). Physics of the earth, Cambridge University Press 
 RECOMMENDED TEXTS/READINGS 
American Geological Institute, National Association of Geoscience Teachers, Busch, 
R.M. and Tasa, D.G., (2014), Laboratory manual in Physical Geology. 10th Ed. 
Prentice Hall. 
Lowrie, W. (2011). A Student's Guide to Geophysical Equations. Cambridge University 
Press 
Telford, W.M. (1990). Applied Geophysics. Cambridge University Press 
 
 
 
 
The course specification was approved by Senate in August 2023 