

GENDER NEEDS
Theseareinterestsorrequirementsthatwomenandmenrequireinorder
toperformtheirdifferentroles.Projectsandprogramsmustrecognize
thevarietyofneedsandseekwaysofaddressingthem.
1

CATEGORIES OF GENDER NEEDS
i.PRACTICAL GENDER NEEDS(PGNs)
ii.STRATEGIC GENDER NEEDS(SGNs)
•PRACTICAL GENDER NEEDS: These are needs that are required to 
assist people to perform their current roles more easily , effectively and 
efficiently. The PGNs basically address the improvement in the condition of 
life of  an individual. These needs can be identified by people themselves. 
These are related to productive roles that men and women perform and  
reproductive roles that women play as mothers and wives. The PGNs are 
usually are addressed by WID approach. Examples of PGNs are lack of 
clean water, inadequate housing, opportunities for earning money, food 
insecurity and sick children. A project might may be designed to meet the  
PGNs of men and women.                                                                                                       
2

STRATIGIC GENDER NEEDS
•SGNs are needs that are required in  order to improve the position of 
individuals in society. SGNs address issues of equity and equal 
opportunities as affecting men, women, girls and boys in a society. 
These needs are derived from an awareness of the females’ and male’s 
disadvantaged positions. For example enabling women  to have equal 
access with men to job opportunities, training, land tenure and for men 
to acquire some skills to handle reproductive gender roles. The SGNs 
are long term in because some forces come into play and it might take 
time to notice the change.(for example we might see a man  take care 
of children when his wife has died)                                                                                                                             
3

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PGNs AND 
SGNs 
•PGNs are immediate and short term while SGNs tend to be long term.
•PGNs are unique or specific to particular me and women while SGNs 
are common to all men ad women.
•PGNs relate to daily needs of individuals(food, housing, income, 
health of children) while SGNs relate to disadvantaged position, 
subordination, lack of resources and education,  vulnerability to 
poverty and violence.
•PGNs can easily be identified by men and women while SGNs 
basically deal with the disadvantaged positions of people and the  
potential for change and ca not easily be identified.
4

DIFFERENCES BETWEEN PGNs AND 
SGNs 
•PGNs can be addressed by provision of specific inputs i.e food, hand 
pumps, medical treatment etc while SGNs can be addressed by 
consciousness raising( creating awareness), increasing self confidence, 
education, strengthening men’s and women’s organization, political 
mobilization etc
•In addressing PGNs men and women are involved as beneficiaries while in 
addressing SGNs women and men are involved as agents in change and as 
participants.
•PGNs can improve the condition of men and women’s lives while SGNs can 
improve the positions of either men  or women in society.
•PGNs generally do not alter traditional role and relationships of men and 
women while SGNs can empower women or men and transform 
relationships.
5