

PHYSICAL PROPERTIES OF 
SOIL

Soil physical properties 
The main soil physical properties are: 
•Soil Profile
•Soil Texture
•Soil Structure
•Soil Consistence/Soil Strength
•Soil Color
•Soil Permeability
•Soil Temperature
•Soil Density

Soil profile
R

Soil texture 
Textureindicates the relative content of particles of various sizes, such as sand, silt and clay in 
thesoil.
Textureinfluences the ease with whichsoilcan be worked, the amount of water and air it holds, and 
the rate at which water can enter and move throughsoil. 
Particles greater than 2mm are not referred to as soil:
Example: 2.0 –7.5mm = gravel
  7.5 – 25mm = cobbles
  25 – 60 mm = stones
  Over 60 mm = boulders
Source
Soil particles/separates
SandSiltClay
USDA. US Dept of Agriculture.
2mm – 50m50m – 2m2m
BSI = British Standards Institute
2mm – 60m60m – 2m2m

TEXTURAL CLASSIFICATION - TRIANGULATION

Determination of soil particles (sizes)
HOW TO DETERMINE THE AMOUNT OF 
SAND, SILT AND CLAY (Particle size 
analysis)
i. By sieving
Used to separate soil particles 2mm and 
rock particles 2mm
Problem: very fine particles are difficult to 
separate using this method

ii. Sedimentation
Putting the soil in a fluid container and the 
different soil particles are going to settle down at 
different rates.
Large particles will fall through a liquid faster than 
do small particles.

Importance of knowing soil texture
Characteristic sandsiltclay
Water holding capacitylowmediumhigh
Total pore spaceLeastMediumHighest
Pore sizeLargeMediumVery fine
Air/water movementVery goodMediumSlow
TillageEasyMediumDifficult
FertilityPoorMediumHigh
Shrinkage/swellingnonemediumVery high

Suitability of different crops 
Sandy soil
Tubers: yams, sweet potato, coconuts, cassava, g/nut
Millet, pineapple, cashew-nut
Loam soil
Fruits, vegetables, maize, wheat, bananas, coffee, tea, 
legumes
Clay soil
Sugarcane, finger-millet, rice 

Soil structure
Soil structure is the arrangement and binding together of soil particles 
into larger clusters, called aggregates
1Granularandcrumbstructuresare individual particles of sand, silt 
and clay grouped together in small, nearly spherical grains. Water 
circulates very easily through such soils. They are commonly found in 
the A-horizon of the soil profile
2 Blockystructuresare soil particles that cling together in nearly square 
or angular blocks having more or less sharp edges. They are commonly 
found in the B-horizon where clay has accumulated

3Prismaticand columnar structuresare soil particles which have 
formed into vertical columns or pillars separated by miniature, but 
definite, vertical cracks. Water circulates with greater difficulty and 
drainage is poor. They are commonly found in the B-horizon.
4 Platy structureis made up of soil particles aggregated in thin 
plates or sheets piled horizontally on one another. Plates often 
overlap, greatly impairing water circulation. They are commonly 
found in forest soils, in A- horizon.

Importance of soil aggregation 
✓Increasing stability against erosion
✓Maintaining porosity and soil water movement, 
✓Improving fertility. 
•The quality of soil structure will decline under most forms 
ofcultivation—the associated mechanical mixing of the soil. 
•it also exposes organic matter to a greater rate of decay 
andoxidation.
•A further consequence of continued cultivation and traffic is the 
development ofcompacted, impermeable layers or pans within 
the profile.

The decline of soil structure underirrigationis usually related to the breakdown of 
aggregates and dispersion ofclay material as a result of rapid wetting. 
A wide range of practices are undertaken to improve soil structure. For instance,
•Increasing organic matter in the soil; 
•Reducing or eliminatingtillage; 
•avoiding soil disturbance during periods of excessive dry or wet when soils may 
accordingly tend to shatter or smear; 
•Ensuring sufficient ground cover to protect the soil from raindrop impact. 
In irrigated land it is e recommended to 
➢apply gypsum (CaSO4) to displace sodium (Na) cations with calcium 
➢avoid rapid wetting
➢and avoid disturbing soils when too wet or dry

Soil Consistence
•Describes the physical condition of soil at various water content as its response/ 
resistance to deformation
•It is a physical property of soil that results from the combination of texture, OM 
content and water content
•Depending upon the amount of water, the soil may be hard, friable or sticky
•Soils generally work best when they have a friable consistence: this means that there 
is just enough water for the formation of a caste when a quantity of soil is squeezed in 
the hand.
•Friable state is where cultivation is supposed to take place. If it is possible to plant, 
time to plant would be at the friable state. The soil responds well to deformation

SOIL COLOUR
Soil colour is usually due to 3 main pigments:
➢black—from organic matter
➢red—from iron andaluminium oxides
➢white—fromsilicates and salt.
Colour can be a useful indicator of some of the general properties of a soil, as 
well as some of the chemical processes that are occurring beneath the surface.

SOIL PERMIABILITY
This is a measure of the soils ability to allow fluids and air to pass through it. 
Thepermeability testis a measure of the rate of the flow of water throughsoil. In thistest, 
water is forced by a known constant pressure through asoilspecimen of known dimensions 
and the rate of flow is determined.
Average permeability for different soil textures in cm/hour
Sand5.0
Sandy loam2.5
Loam1.3
Clay loam0.8
Silty clay0.25
Clay0.05

SOIL TEMPERATURE 
Soil temperature is the measurement of the warmth in the soil 
Ideal soil temperature for planting most plants are 18 to 24 Degrees Celsius 
Mean annual soil temperatures are 2 – 4 Degrees Celsius warmer than air temperatures 
Soil temperature is important as it affects
•Chemical reactions in the soil
•Growth of plants
•Decomposition of organic matter
Management of soil temperature
➢Regulating soil moisture content
➢Mulching
➢Intercropping 

SOIL DENSITY
Soil compaction occurs when soil particles are pressed together, reducing pore 
space between them.  One way to quantify the change is by measuring the bulk 
density and the particle density. 
PARTICLE DENSITY (
p
)
Mass per unit volume of the dry soil solids.  It is measured as mass of 
grains/Volume of particles Units: g/cm
3.  
Pycnometer method can be used to 
determine particle density.
BULK DENSITY (
b
)
Is the dry weight of soil per unit volume. Bulk density considers both the solids 
and the pore space; whereas, particle density considers only the mineral solids.
It is measured as mass of solids/total volume [Volume of solids+ Air+ water]
As the pore space decrease in a soil, the bulk density is increased. 

SOIL PROPERTIES 
PHYSICAL CHEMICALS
CHEMICAL PROPERTIES
BIOLOGICAL PROPORTIES OF SOIL
SOIL FERTILITY 
FERTLIZERS
INORGANIC FERTILIZER
ORGANIC FARTILIZER
SOIL EROSION AND CONSERVATION
ESTIMATING SOIL LOSS
PHYSICAL SOIL AND WATER CONSERVATION MEASURES
BOILOGICAL CONSERVATION MEASURES 
LAND USE CAPABILITY CLASSIFICATION AND LAND USE PLANNING
VILLAGE BASED CATCHMENT CONSERVATION

FEEDBACK?