

Irrigation Equipment and Machinery   Sylvester Richard Chikabvumbwa 
OVERVIEW OF IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT AND MACHINERY 
The impact of using different machines and equipment in irrigation farming  
Machines and equipment are of essence in irrigation farming as they tend to 
 Improve scale of production 
 Save labour  
 Save time for other activities 
 Improve  production  efficiency,  farming  standards,  quality  of  produce  and  standard  
of living 
 Eliminate drudgery 
Discussion 
 Suggest the negative effects of introducing irrigation equipment and machinery in 
developing countries like Malawi 
Why is there still low level of mechanisation in irrigation in Malawi? 
Malawi still face low levels of mechanisation and use of advanced irrigation equipment due to 
problems such as the ones below: 
 Mechanisation favours large scale farming  as opposed to Malawi’s small scale farming 
with little capital and fragmented fields. 
 Lack of expertise to handle complicated machines due to low education levels in Malawi  
 A poor economy to allow investing in importing machinery and equipment 
 Local engineers have failed to develop  mechanisation technologies that are well suited to  
people 
 Inappropriate government policies 
 Abundant cheap labour and fear of creating unemployment 
 High capital cost of mechanisation technologies 
Discussion 
 Suggest ways that could be used to improve the use of irrigation equipment and 
machinery in developing countries like Malawi. 
 
 
 
 
 
  

Irrigation Equipment and Machinery   Sylvester Richard Chikabvumbwa 
WHAT TO COVER 
 Surveying equipment 
 Construction equipment 
 Softwares used in irrigation 
 Surface irrigation equipment 
 Drip irrigation equipment 
 Sprinkler irrigation equipment 
 Pipe sizing 
 Tank sizing and Rainwater harvesting tanks 
 Pumps (Solar and Water pumps) 
 Power sources 
 
LESSON ONE: Brainstorm on the following softwares, equipment and machinery and 
their uses 
COMMON SOFTWARES USED IN IRRIGATION 
 Surfer 
 AutoCAD 
 ArcMap  
 ArcView GIS 
 ClimWAT/CropWAT 
 ETo Calculator 
 Model Maker (IrriMaker, IrriExpress) 
 IrriCAD 
 Google Earth 
COMMONLY USED SURVEYING EQUIPMENT IN IRRIGATION 
 Dumpy Level 
 Theodolite 
 Total Station 
 Differential GPS 
 GPS 
 Ranging rods 
 Staff 
 Tripod stands 
 Tape measure 
 Booking sheets 

Irrigation Equipment and Machinery   Sylvester Richard Chikabvumbwa 
 
COMMONLY USED CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT IN IRRIGATION 
 Bulldozer 
 Grader 
 Scraper 
 Landplane 
 Excavator 
 Dragline 
 Lorry 
 Tippers 
 Poker vibrators 
 Bowsers 
 Tractor 
 Dumper 
 De-watering pumps 
 Concrete mixers 
 Rollers/compactors 
 
SURFACE IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT 
 Siphons 
 PVC pipes 
 Valves : Gate Valves 
 Hydrants 
 Spiles 
 Tanks 
 Pumps 
DRIP IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT 
 Tanks 
 Pipes: Main pipes, Submains and Laterals 
 Fittings:  Straight connectors, Elbows, Tees, Couplings, End caps, Takeoffs, 
Emitters/drippers 
 Valves: Gate and Ball 
 Filters 
SPRINKLER IRRIGATION EQUIPMENT 
 Tanks 
 Pipes: Main pipes, Submains, Risers  and Sprinklers 
 Fittings:  Couplings 

Irrigation Equipment and Machinery   Sylvester Richard Chikabvumbwa 
 Valves: Gate  
CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT 
When an irrigation project is being undertaken, the following equipment would be available at 
the site. 
 Bulldozer: Used to carry out works such as bush clearing, movement of soil for short 
distances, cutting thicker layers of soil during land levelling, levelling of anthills, making 
drains and flood bunds. 
 Scraper: Wheeled or crawled tractors pulling a wheeled bucket of up to 30 m
3
 volume. 
The scraper cuts soil with a sharp blade at the front bottom of the bucket. The soil is 
stored in the bucket and can be released at the required location. These are ideal for 
carrying soil over long distances, for example during land levelling operations or to make 
up canal embankments. 
 Grader: A machine with a blade approximately half way its frame. It is used to construct 
drains, roads, etc., and to carry out more accurate land levelling operations than a scraper 
can do. Graders can be motorized or towed by a tractor. The latter are much slower in 
carrying out the jobs and, depending on the job, a powerful tractor is required for towing 
these graders. 
 Dragline: A machine with a bucket attached to ropes. The bucket can be thrown over a 
distance of up to 15 m away. Draglines are used for excavation works in construction 
pits, for digging and cleaning canals, etc. 
 Excavator: A machine with a bucket, which is hydraulically operated. It is usually 
crawler mounted for ease of working in muddy conditions. It can carry out the same jobs 
as the dragline although its reach is shorter, usually not exceeding 10 m. It is often used 
for canal and pipe trench excavations and to load soil onto tippers. 
 Land plane: Consists of a long-wheeled frame with a blade. The blade is tilted forwards 
at the top. It is used for final land levelling and can be accurate to 2-3 cm. 
 Loader with backhoe: A large tractor-like machine with buckets in front and behind. It 
is used for excavations of canals and trenches for pipes, loading soil, etc. 
 Lorry: Used to carry materials and equipment to the project site. 
 Tipper: Used to carry materials and equipment to the project sites. They are suitable for 
transporting soil, sand and coarse aggregate as the back of the truck can be hydraulically 
lifted, thus facilitating easy offloading of bulky materials. 
 Lowbed with horse: A large, flat trailer usually pulled by a heavy vehicle, the horse. It is 
used to transport large machinery, such as bulldozers, scrapers and graders over long 
distances to project sites. 
 Tractor and trailer: Used for transporting materials and small equipment, usually within 
the project area. 
 Dumper: A small vehicle with a container in front. The capacity of the container can 
vary from 300 to 1300 litres. It is used to carry materials, such as concrete, on the project 
site. 
 

Irrigation Equipment and Machinery   Sylvester Richard Chikabvumbwa 
 Concrete mixer: Has a pan or drum driven by an engine and is used for mixing concrete. 
The blades inside the pan or drum facilitate the mixing of the concrete. Some mixers have 
weighing equipment attached, to mix the concrete by mass rather than by volume. The 
size of the mixers can vary from as small as 35 litres yield to well over 100 litres yield 
per mix. 
 Poker: A mechanically-moved stick used for the compaction of concrete through 
vibration. 
 Bowser: A tank for storing water, fuel, etc., on project sites. Bowsers have varying 
capacities and are normally mounted on wheels. 
 Roller or compactor: A heavy cylinder, which is moved mechanically or by hand. It is 
used for compacting soil. A compactor is also used for compacting the soil, using a 
vibrating plate. 
 De-watering pump: This is a small pump used to pump water away from the 
construction site, for example trenches or construction pits.  
 
 

Irrigation Equipment and Machinery   Sylvester Richard Chikabvumbwa 
INDIVIDUAL ASSIGNMENT ONE 
The following table shows some activities which are normally done when constructing a surface 
irrigation scheme. The activities range from site establishment, construction of conveyance 
structures, drainage structures and a fence. 
No Activity Months No. 
of 
days 
Resources required 
Labour 
required 
Main Machines 
required 
  J F M A M    
1 Site establishment      5   
2 Procurement of materials and 
transport to the site 
     42   
3 Setting out grid and irrigation 
layout 
     10   
4 Canal construction (1500 m)      35   
5 Land levelling (8 hectares)      30   
6 Drains (1200 m)      5   
7 Roads (1800 m)      6   
8 Structures (10)      16   
9 Fencing (2500 m)      10   
10 Finishing, Clearing      11   
 
a. Prepare a work plan of your choice for the activities using the number of days given 
(include dates for each activity) 
b. Name the main machines that would be required to conduct each activity 
c. Estimate the number of labour required and number of machines required for each 
activity within the required time (include both skilled and unskilled labour) 
 