

/Essays/Biology
Disclaimer: This is an example of a student written essay.
Click here for sample essays written by our professional writers.
View full disclaimer 
Share this:       
Native starches are structurally too weak and limited functions for application in pharmaceutical, food and non-food technologies due
to its inherent weakness of hydration, swelling and structural organization. Unprocessed starches produce weak-bodied, cohesive
rubbery pastes when cooked and undesirable gels when the pastes are cooled. To enhance viscosity, texture, stability among many
desired functional properties desired, starch and their derivatives are modified by chemical, physical, and enzymatic methods.
Modifications are necessary to create a range of functionality.
Starch modification can be introduced by altering the structure and affecting the structure including the hydrogen bonding in a
controlled manner to enhance and extend their application in industrial prospective. This modification includes esterification,
etherification, cross linking, acid hydrolysis, enzymatic hydrolysis heat treatment and grafting of starch. Modified starches can be found
applicable practices in food industry and non-food industry.
Various types of modified starches for wide applications in many industries
Pregelatinized starch
It is the simplest starch modification, prepared by cooking. It maintains starch integrity while providing cold water thickening which  is a
process that breaks down the intermolecular bonds of starch molecules in the presence of water and heat, allowing the hydrogen
bonding sites (the hydroxyl hydrogen and oxygen) to engage more water.
Cross-linked starch
Cross linking is the most important modified form that used in the food industry. It involves replacement of hydrogen bond present
between starch chains by stronger, permanent covalent bonds. Distarch phosphate or, adipate are commonly used in cross-linked
starch. Cross-linked starches offer acid, heat and shear stability over the native starch. Food with this type of starch processing tends to
have longer shelf life.
Oxidized starch
The processing includes reaction with oxidizing agent such as sodium hypochlorite or peroxide. This type of starch is mainly used as
surface sizing agent or coating binder and available in different viscosity grade. Oxidized starches have shorter chain lengths than
native starches. It improves whiteness and reduces microbiological content. Oxidized starches are the best thickener for applications
requiring gels of low rigidity. This improves adhesion in batters and breading.
Cationic starch
Cationic starches are produced by reacting native starches with tertiary or, quaternary amines, using wet or dry production processes.
They are mainly used in paper forming process. Cationic starch represents high performance starch derivatives widely used by paper
manufactures to increase strength and retention. Cationic starches carry a formal positive charge over the entire pH range creating their
affinity towards negatively charged substrates, such as cellulose, pulp and some synthetic fibres, aqueous suspensions of minerals and
slimes and biologically active macromolecules. Cationic starch is also added at the beater to improve drainage on the wire, better sheet
formation, and enhancement of the sizing efficiency of an alum-rosin size.
Anionic starch
Anionic starches are prepared by reaction with phosphoric acid and alkali metal phosphates or by making derivative with carboxymethyl
group.
Thinned starch
Get Help With Your Essay
If you need assistance with writing your essay, our professional essay writing service is here to help!
Essay Writing Service
Order
OffersSupport
Sign In+44 115 966 7955Notifications

/Essays/Biology
These are produced through depolymerisation reaction by hydrochloric acid or other acids. Unmodified starches are treated with a
mineral acid at temperature lower than gelatinization and results in partially hydrolyzed starch molecules. This cleaves the chain length
and lower viscosity. It increases the tendency to retro gradation. The lower viscosity permits higher concentrations to be used forming
rigid gels in gums pastilles and jellies. In these applications, increased set-back leading to the formation of strong gels gives these
starches significant advantages over native starches. Extended applications in food industry are found by acid-thinned starch in
conjunction with esterification and etherification reaction.
Acetylated starch
Acetylated starch (E1420) esterification with acetic anhydride Starch after treatment with acetic anhydride produces starch esters
which are useful in biodegradable applications. In particular, high starch acetates provide thermo plasticity, hydrophobicity and
compatibility with other additives. The result of this treatment is a stability starch which will produce pastes that will withstand several
freeze-thaw cycles and prevent syneresis (weeping) occurs. Wide applications are in foods as texturing agent and provide good freeze-
thaw stability. Extended applications in food industry are found by acetylated starch in conjunction with cross-linked starch.
Dextrin
Dextrin (E1400) is formed by roasting the starch with hydrochloric acid. Dextrination is the heating of powdered starch, mostly in the
presence of small amounts of acids, at different temperatures and with different reaction times. Dextrin is used as adhesives in paper
and textile based industry.
Grafted starch
Grafted starches are produced by free radical copolymerization with ethylenically unsaturated monomers. Starch grafted with synthetic
polymers is most utilized  tarches from different botanical origins were grafted with 1, 3 butadiene, styrene, acrylamide, acrylonitrile and
Meth acrylic acid using free redox reaction.
Starch ethers
Starch ethers are produced by a nucleophilic substitution reaction with an ethylenically unsaturated monomer, followed by acid-
catalyzed hydrolysis for viscosity adjustment.
Physically modified starch
Native starch can be modified with mechanical treatment, using spray drying technique, annealing technique
Enzyme modified starch
Enzyme-treated starch which includes maltodextrin, cyclodextrin Starch modified with amylase enzyme produces derivative with good
adhesion property and mainly used in coating the food with colorant.
APPLICATION IN FOOD INDUSTRY
Frozen Food
To stabilize the food products starches are used in frozen bottle foods to provide freeze-thaw stability and retrogradation.
Flavor Encapsulation
Modified starches are used to encapsulate or, preserve the flavour of the food products. Octenylsuccinylated derivatives and other
starch hydrolyzates are used as flavour encapsulation.
Dairy Products
Modified starches are used in a wider way to the dairy products; it provides variety of effects, including enhanced viscosity, cut ability,
mouth feel and stability. In puddings, starch is used to enhance viscosity and smoothness. Starches are used in yogurts and sour cream
to control syneresis and enhance thickness.
Canned Food
Canning process preserves food for up to several years by achieving a temperature sufficient to destroy or inactivate food poisoning or
spoilage microbes. Starch is most commonly used to thicken, stabilize and enhance the mouth feel of canned foods such as puddings,
pie- fillings, soups, sauces and gravies. Highly cross-linked starches are used for this purpose.
 
Share this:       