

GENDER ANALYSIS
GenderAnalysiscanbedefinedasawayoflookingatasituationin
ordertobringintofocusthecurrentandpotentialrolesofmen,women,
boysandgirlsandtheresourcesandbenefitsmen,women,boysand
girlshaveaccessandcontroloverandtheimplicationsontheirneeds.
Additionally,genderanalysisidentifiestheconstraints(restraining
forces)thathinderfullparticipationofmen,women,boysandgirlsin
developmentworkaswellasassetsorresources(drivingforces),which
mayfacilitatewomen,men,girlsandboysinvolvementindevelopment
work.
1

IMPORTANCE OF GENDER ANALYSIS
i.To get realistic information about the situation on the ground
ii.To establish potential opportunities and threats
iii.To anticipate impact of the project on different stakeholders
iv.To identify the imbalances that accrue amongst the various gender 
groups.
Note: Gender analysis is carried out to ensure the visibility of men, 
women, boys and through the use of data and information disaggregated 
by gender and age.
2

TOOLS FOR GENDER ANALYSIS
There  are many tools used in gender analysis and the tools are 
referred to as Frameworks of Analysis. The tools are useful in:
i.Gathering information
ii.Assessing gender needs
iii.Raising gender awareness
iv.Identifying the stakeholders.
3

TOOLS FOR GENDER ANALYSIS( 
FRAMEWORKS FOR GENDER ANALYSIS)
i.Calorine Moser Framework
ii.People Oriented Planning for use in Emergency Context Framework
iii.Gender Analysis Matrix For Community Based Analysis 
Framework
iv.Gender Equality and Empowerment Framework
v.Socioeconomic and Gender Analysis Framework
vi.Harvard Analytical Framework(HAF)
The framework to use depends on the situation to be analysed. 
4

HARVARD ANALYTICAL 
FRAMEWORK 
It was developed by the Harvard University in the United States of 
America. It was developed in the 1980s and stands as one of the 
pioneering and most utilized models in gender analysis. The framework 
is used to collect data at micro level(household and community level) 
HAF has 4 components which are referred to as components; Activity 
Profile, Access and Control Profile, Influencing or Determining Factors 
Profile and the Project Cycle Profile
i.ACTIVITY PROFILE: It identifies  all relevant productive, 
reproductive and community tasks and addresses the question who 
does what for all relevant farm , home and community tasks. It also 
looks at when and where the activity takes pace. 
5

HARVARD ANALYTICAL 
FRAMEWORK
ii. ACCESS AND CONTROL PROFILE
This profile clarifies and documents who has access to resources and 
who controls their use in relation to the tasks identified in the Activity 
Profile in terms of; 
•Who has access to and control over resources( for example land, 
labour, extension services)?
•Who has access to and control over benefits?
                                                                                                                             
6

HARVARD ANALYTICAL 
FRAMEWORK
iii. INFLUENCING /DETERMINING FACTORS
This profile identifies factors that shape differences between men and women: 
what are political, economic or cultural factors affecting;
•The gender differences identified in the above two profiles?
•What are the past and present influences?
•What are the opportunities  constraints?
iv. PROJECT CYCLEANALYSIS PROFILE
This is the final component which consists of  examining a project
Proposal or  areas of intervention in the light of gender disaggregated data 
and social change.
7

GENDER MAINSTREAMING
This is  the process of integrating gender equality across the board in 
program or project activities in order to promote equity and equality 
issues for men, women, boys and girls in all development work.
Thus taking into account gender in all policy,  program, administrative 
and financial activities in organizational procedures thereby contributing 
to profound socio-economic and organizational transformation.
Mainstreaming strategy calls for the introduction of gender analysis and 
planning in all activities.
8

REASONS FOR MAINSTREAMING 
GENDER
Mainstreaming is done in order to achieve total, sustainable, equitable 
and accelerated development. Thus the entire population of men, 
women as well as boys and girls need to contribute meaningfully to 
development efforts.
Gender inequality is understood to contribute to underdevelopment and 
poverty ; thus it is n obstacle to development. Hence the need for gender 
consideration to avoid marginalizing some groups.
9

MAINSTREAMING GENDER INTO AN 
ORGANIZATION
•This is referred to as institutionalizing gender.
Gender mainstreaming is a process or a means towards achieving the goal of  equity 
and equality in development. For this to happen gender must be institutionalized in 
the organizations through;
i.POLICY FORMULATION: This is an entry point in the promotion of gender 
mainstreaming in an organization. The overall policy must indicate to what 
extent do interventions taking place impact differently on gender roles, 
resources and gender needs of men, women, boys and girls.
ii.STAFF DEVELOPMENT: There is need to have well trained staff in gender 
and there should be adequate staffing levels. Professional Men and women 
should be trained in gender policy and planning  skills. There should be equal 
opportunities for women, men as workers in an organization in areas of training 
or education, promotions, postings or transfers.
10

MAINSTREAMING GENDER INTO AN 
ORGANIZATION
iii. DELIVERY OF PROGRAMS AND PROJECTS;  The programs 
and projects being implemented must meet needs of both men and 
women. Programs or projects become unsuccessful if interventions do 
not address men’s, women’s, girls’ and boys’ needs. For effective 
institutionalization, groups involved in the delivery of programs and 
projects must not only  include professionals and practitioners but also 
men, women, boys and girls from the community.
Ensure that goods and services for programs target  both men and 
women. Budget allocation must indicate how much go to women and 
men or boys and girls depending on the type of intervention.
11

CHALLENGES TO SUCCESSFUL 
GENDER MAINSTREAMING
i.TRA:NSLATING POLICY INTO CONCRETE ACTION: The need to 
ensure that projects and activities at the lowest level(household) maintain the 
principles, achieve expected outcomes and translate into tangible benefits.
ii.PUTTING RESOURCES TO COMMITMENT: The allocation of resources 
is a clear indicator of the importance accorded to a program or active relative to 
others. This involves finances and other inputs , staffing, technical assistance , 
capacity  etc. The extent to  which  gender is internalized and applied depends 
on the commitment, knowledge and skills of trainers.
iii.SUSTAINABLE MOMENTUM: The gender vocal at international and 
national level does not match with reality on the ground  especially at the 
grassroot level. 
 
12

CHALLENGES TO SUCCESSFUL 
GENDER MAINSTREAMING
iv. TAKING THE BENEFITS TO THE HOUSEHOLD: The 
household is the ultimate goal of for gender mainstreaming. It is the 
level at which policies must translate into rights , equal responsibilities  
and services.
v. GETTING CRITICAL MASS OF GENDER SENSITIVE 
PEOPLE: The development of a gender sensitive culture depends on 
the creation of a lot of people(practitioners)  whose commitment to 
gender equality is totally  internalized into a way of life. Gender should 
especially target men in places  that matter as these are more likely to be 
listened to  and their views                                                                                                 
13

MAINSTREAMING PRINCIPLES
i.Interventions should target determinants
ii.Gender concerns must be addressed at every stage of the project 
cycle
iii.Gender mainstreaming should be guided by a policy framework
iv.Analysis is paramount in gender mainstreaming
v.Use gender disaggregated data.
14

MAINSTREAMING GENDER IN THE 
PROJECT CYCLE
Mainstreaming of gender should be done at various stages of a project cycle 
to make sure that gender is mainstreamed in the project as follows:
1.PROJECT IDENTIFICATION PHASE: this is the first stage in the 
project which deal with situation analysis i.e collection of baseline data. 
Distinguish problems and priorities of women from of those men. Involve 
the community members  in assessing their own needs. Distinguish 
livelihood systems and priorities of poor women and men from the non 
poor. Mobilize communities by training them. This important because I 
will make people to become aware of their own community situation own 
needs and problems so as to realize root causes and consequences of their 
problems. Identify possible barriers likely to affect women’s access to 
project resources. This will ensure that the right people have been 
reached.
15

MAINSTREAMING GENDER IN THE 
PROJECT CYCLE
2. PROJECT FORMULATION OR PROJECT DESIGN PHASE: 
Formulate general project strategy considering practical and strategic 
objectives of women, men, boys and girls, poor and non- poor 
participants. Design a management information system to provide 
disaggregated data  on women and men, poor and non poor participants. 
Objectives, activities, outputs, outcomes and indicators should be 
specified in a differentiated manner where relevant. Gender aspects 
should be incorporated in the project agreement.
16

MAINSTREAMING GENDER IN THE 
PROJECT CYCLE
3. PROGRAM IMPLEMENTATION PHASE: During implementation  
create awareness and understanding on the importance of addressing 
gender issues among all those involved in the project design and 
implementation(project staff, associated ministries, trainers, facilitators 
and members of the community).Determinants of gender inequality. 
Allocation of resources  should take into account gender inequality.
There should be monitoring indicators for gender responsiveness. 
Gender gaps and inequalities should be addressed. There should be 
training of participants in  gender
Collect gender disaggregated data.
17

MAINSTREAMING GENDER IN THE 
PROJECT CYCLE
4. PROJECT MONITORING  AND EVALUATION PHASE: 
Project objectives, activities, budgets, resource allocations and 
achievements for gender sensitivity should be reviewed(gender specific 
indicators). 
Determine gender gaps in program and project objectives
Conduct beneficiary analysis.
Formulate recommendations for adjustment of project activities and 
policy( replanning)
18