

10/2/2025
1
AGRICULTURAL MARKETING
(AAE33103)
Provided By:
LUANAR-NRC
Faculty of Natural Resources and Life Sciences
Department of Agriculture & Food Systems
1
MODULE DETAILS
LECTURE HOURS30
CREDIT HOURS2.0
METHOD OF ASSESSMENT
Continuous Assessment 40%
End of Semester Examination 60%
2

10/2/2025
2
PREAMBLE
вҖўWhat is the backbone of MalawiвҖҷs Economy?
вҖўWhat percentage of the rural population does agriculture support in 
rural areas?
вҖўWhich agricultural commodities does Malawi Export?
вҖўWhere does Malawi export its agricultural commodities?
вҖўWhat challenges/risks are associated with agricultural production & 
marketing?
вҖўDoes government have a role/part to rectify risks/challenges which 
affect agricultural production & marketing?
3
AIM & OBJECTIVES OF MODULE
AIM OF MODULE
пҒұThe course aimsto equip students in agriculture with knowledge, skills and practices
in Agricultural Marketingto assist farmers make informed decisions regarding
production and marketing of produce in order to maximise profits.
MODULE OBJECTIVES
By the end of the module students should be able to:
пҒұExplain key concepts used in marketing as applied in agricultural sector.
пҒұApply basic economic concepts in Agricultural marketing
пҒұDescribe strategies for attracting and sustaining demand for agricultural products
efficiently for farmers
пҒұApply agricultural policies in agricultural marketing
4

10/2/2025
3
TOPICS OF STUDY
пҒұKey Terminologies and Concepts:Farms marketing; Needs, wants,
satisfaction & product/service; Exchange, transaction and market;
Marketing concept; Market utility; Demand, Supply and Elasticity;
Market Structures
пҒұIntroduction to Marketing:Meaning and importance of marketing; Role
of marketing in the value chain; Problems in Agricultural marketing;
Unique features of Agricultural products; Classification of markets
пҒұMarketing Functions:Classification of marketing functions; Marketing
mix (product, price, promotion and place); Market intelligence and
market research; Intermediaries and marketing agencies; Agricultural
marketing institutions (ADMARC, ACE etc.)
5
TOPICS OF STUDY...
пҒұAgricultural Marketing Linkages and Strategies for Minimising Risk:Market
integration; Marketing efficiency; Marketing costs; Market margins and mark-
up; Risks in marketing produce; Methods of minimising risk (speculation,
hedging, futures, forward, contracts etc..); International trade
пҒұAgricultural Price Policy:Introduction to Agricultural Price Policy;
Characteristics of agricultural product prices; Agricultural price stabilisation
policy; Types of stabilisation policies
6

10/2/2025
4
RESOURCES:
пӮ§PRESCRIBED TEXTS
пӮ§Department of Agriculture,( 2003). Agricultural Marketing: Small-scale farmer 
marketing series. Pretoria, RSA. 11pp.
пӮ§Rae, A.N. (1994). Agricultural Management Economics: Activity and Decision 
Making. CAB. New York.
пӮ§RECOMMENDED READINGS
пӮ§Crawford I.M. (1997). Agricultural and Food Marketing Management. Marketing 
and Agribusiness Text 2.FAO. Rome.
пӮ§Kohls, L R., and Uhl . (2002). The Marketing of Agricultural Products, Ninth 
Edition. Prentice Hall Inc, New Jersey. 
7
Agricultural Marketing
пҒұAgriculture:
пғјActivities aimed at the use of natural resources for production of crops
& livestock for human welfare.
пғјGrowing and/or raising crops and livestock (including aquaculture).
пҒұMarketing
пғјPhilip Kotler:A human activity directed at satisfying peopleвҖҷs needs
and wants through exchange process.
пғјAmerican Marketing Association: Performance of business activities
that directs the flow of goods and services from producers to users.
8

10/2/2025
5
Evolution of Marketing Concept
пӮ§The Product Concept-Consumers will favour those products that offer
the most quality, performance and features and therefore the
organization should devote its strategy to making continuous product
improvement, ,Kotler (1996).
пӮ§The Selling Concept- Consumers will not buy enough of the
organizationвҖҷs  product  unless  the  organization  undertakes
substantial/heavy promotion efforts.
пӮ§The Marketing ConceptKey to achieve organizational goal is for the
organization to determine the needs and wants of the target market
and to adapt itself to delivering the desired satisfaction more effectively
than its competitors.
9
Agricultural Marketing
пӮ§Defined as all activities involved in the supply of farm inputs to the farmers
and movement of agricultural products frompoint of production(e.g. farms)
to consumers (point of consumption).
пӮ§Includes:
пғјAnalysis of consumer needs, consumer motivations, and purchasing and
consumption behaviour,
пғјAssessment of demand and supply for farm-inputs and farm products,
пғјPost-harvest handling of farm products,
пғјPerformance of various marketing activities (e.g. transportation,
processing, financing, warehousing/storage, grading, packaging),
пғјPublic policies and programmes relating to pricing and purchasing of farm
inputs (e.g. Affordable Farm Inputs Program) and agricultural produce
(e.g.RoleofADMARC).
10

10/2/2025
6
Agricultural Marketing Utilities
пғјUtilityrefers to the benefits (value) created through performance of
marketing activities.
пғјUtility can be in terms ofForm, Time, Place and Possession.
пӮ§Form Utility:
пғҳThrough processing function, a product is changed from its raw form into a semi
or fully processed form (e.g. groundnuts/soy beans into oil, sugarcane into sugar,
cotton into cloth and wheat into flour and bread)
пғҳProcessed product becomes more useful (valuable/provides more satisfaction)
than in its raw form
11
Agricultural Marketing Utilities...
пӮ§Place Utility: 
пғҳTransportation function shifts products from a place of plenty (where they are
less appreciated) to a place of high demand.
пғҳProducts command higher prices at the place of high need.
пӮ§Time Utility:
пғҳThrough storage marketing adds time utility to the products by making them
available at the time when they are needed.
пӮ§Possession Utility:
пғҳBuying and selling functions help to transfer ownership from one person to
another.
пғҳProducts are transferred from people who value their products less to people
who place a high value in the same product.
12

10/2/2025
7
Market Demand & Supply
пҒұDemand:Quantities/amount of products that consumers are willing and able to
purchase at various possible prices during a specified period of time
пҒұLaw of Demand
пӮ§There is a negative or inverse relationship between price of a product and
quantity demanded of that product,ceteris paribus(other factors remaining
constant).
пӮ§Price is a common determinant of demand.
пҒұOther Determinants of Demand (Demand Shifters)
пғјPrices of related goodsвҶ’Substitutes and Complements
пғјIncome level of consumer-Normally, high incomes lead to high demand for
certain products.
пғјTastes & Preferences of potential buyers/consumers (e.g. Smart phones versus
ordinary phones)
пғјPopulation-Growth in population of people creates high demand for products.
13
Demand...
пҒұDemand Schedule
пғјShows relationship between quantity demanded and price, all other
things being held constant.
14
Price of Maize per 
Kilogram (MK)
Quantity Demanded (Kg)
100100
80130
70140
50200

10/2/2025
8
The Demand Curve
Thedemand curveis a graph
illustrating how much of a given
product a household would be willing
to buy at different prices.
15
Supply
пҒұQuantity/amount of a product that producers (e.g. farmers) are willing
and able to make available for sale at various market prices during a
specific period.
пҒұLaw of Supply
пғјThe law of supply states that supply of commodities is positively
related to the price of the commodity.
пғҳThe theory reveals that producers are willing to offer more of their products
for sale at higher prices than at low prices.
16

10/2/2025
9
Supply Curve
пҒұAsupply curveis a
graphillustrating
quantities  of  goods
producers are willing
and able to offer for
sale at different prices.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
020406080100120140160
Price of Bread (MK)
Quantity of Bread (Loaves)
Supply Curve for Bread at NRC for the month of 
August 2025 
17
Determinants of Supply 
пғјPrice of Goods-As the price of product X rises while all the costs and the
prices of all goods remain unchanged, production of X becomes more
profitable.
пғјPrices of Other Goods -If the price of some other goods, say Y, rises, with
the price of goods X remaining unchanged, some of the firms now
producing X may be attracted to move into Y production, motivated by
their search for profit.
пғјPrices of Factors of Production-As the price of factors of production (e.g.
labour, land, fertilizer, seed) used intensively by X producers rise, costs of
production will also rise. This will cause supply of product X to fall.
пғјState of Technology -Technological improvements (e.g. invention of new
machines or more efficient techniques of production) reduce cost of
production, and thus, increase profit margins. This promotes high
production and high supply of products on the market.
18

10/2/2025
10
пғјExpectation-Production decisions are also influenced by expected
future prices. For example, if price ofproduct Xis expected to rise,
firms may decide to produce & supply more of product X, to take
advantage of the expected high price of X.
пғјTastes of Producers-If producers prefercommodity Xover
commodity Y, even though profits from both products are similar,
commodity X will be supplied more than commodity Y. A change in
producer's tastein favour ofproducing a commodity will increase its
supply, while a change in tastesagainstproducing the commodity will
reduce its supply.
пғјGovernment Policies (e.g. Tax and Subsidy Policy)-Increased tax on a
product reduces its supply, since tax increases cost of production.
Subsidies in cost of production provide incentives to producers, with a
result being increased production.
19
Determinants of Supply... 
Market Equilibrium
пӮ§Anequilibriumis the condition that
exists when quantity supplied and
quantity demanded on the market
are equal.
пӮ§This equality of quantity demanded
and quantity supplied is called
Equilibrium Quantityand the price
that occurs at this balancing point is
calledEquilibrium Price or Clearing
Price
20

10/2/2025
11
Market Equilibrium
пӮ§If sellers/producers raise prices of
products above the equilibrium price
there will be more of the commodity
(d)offered for sale than buyers will
take(b).
пӮ§Similarly if the price falls below the
equilibrium price, buyers will be
eager to buy more of a commodity
and they will tend to compete and
outbid each other thus raising the
price.
пӮ§There is therefore a tendency for
market prices to move towards the
equilibrium price.
21
Market Disequilibria: Market Surplus & Market Shortage
пҒұMarket surplus
пғјThe market price is above equilibrium
пғјThere is excess supply which leads producers to lower prices of goods &
services
пғјQuantity demanded increases and quantity supplied decreases
пҒұMarket shortage
пғјThe market price is below equilibrium:
пғјThere is shortage of goods and services
пғјProducers raise prices
пғјQuantity demanded decreases and quantity supplied increases
22

10/2/2025
12
Market Disequilibria-Market Shortage
пӮ§Excess Demand, orMarket
Shortage,is a condition that
exists when quantity demanded
exceeds quantity supplied at the
current price.
пӮ§When  quantity  demanded
exceeds quantity supplied, price
tends to rise until equilibrium is
restored
23
Market Disequilibria-Market Surplus
пӮ§Excess  Supply,  orMarket
Surplus,is the condition that
exists when quantity supplied
exceeds quantity demanded at
the current price.
пӮ§When   quantity   exceeds
quantity  demanded,  price
supplied tends to fall until
equilibrium is restored.
24

10/2/2025
13
Elasticity 
пӮ§Elasticity is a measure of responsiveness of one variable(e.g. quantity of goods
supplied or demanded)due to change (s) in another variable(e.g. change in
price of the goods).
пӮ§The greater the elasticity, the greater the responsiveness.
Price Elasticity of Demand
пӮ§According to the law of demand, whenever price of products rises, the
quantity of products demanded falls.Thus, the price elasticity of demand is
always negative.
пӮ§Price elasticity of demand and supply gives the exact quantity response to a
change in price.
пӮ§Demand iselasticif the percentage change in quantity is greater than the
percentage change in price.E > 1 (Elastic Demand) means that quantity
demanded changes by a greater percentage than the percentage change in
price.
25
пҒұElasticity...
пғјDemand isinelasticwhen the percentage change in quantity is less than the
percentage change in price.E<1 (Inelastic Demand)means that the percentage
change in quantity demanded of a product is less than the percentage change
in price of the product.
пғјElasticity is Unitarywhen the percentage change in price of a product is equal
to percentage change in quantity demanded of that product
пҒұDeterminants of Elasticity of Demand
пғјAvailability of Close Substitutes- Substitutability
пғјNecessities versus Luxuries (e.g. Maize vs. Beef)
пғјTime Horizon
26

10/2/2025
14
Calculation of Elasticity: Percentage Method
пӮ§Price Elasticity of Demand (E
d
)= 
аҜүаҜҳаҜҘаҜ–аҜҳаҜЎаҜ§аҜ”аҜҡаҜҳ а®јаҜӣаҜ”аҜЎаҜҡаҜҳ аҜңаҜЎ а®ҪаҜҳаҜ аҜ”аҜЎаҜ—
аҜүаҜҳаҜҘаҜ–аҜҳаҜЎаҜ§аҜ”аҜҡаҜҳ а®јаҜӣаҜ”аҜЎаҜҡаҜҳ аҜңаҜЎ аҜүаҜҘаҜңаҜ–аҜҳ
пӮ§The percentage changes in the equation are calculated by dividingthe
changein quantity demanded by the original quantity demanded and
by dividing thechangein price by the original price
пӮ§Disregard the negative sign. Consider only the absolute figure.
27
Calculation of Elasticity : Percentage Method
пӮ§Suppose an increase in price of beef from MK2,500/Kg to MK3,000 per Kg 
has reduced quantity demanded from 15 Kilograms to 10 Kilograms per week 
in Mudzi village. Calculate price elasticity of demand.
пӮ§
вҲҶаҜ—
вҲҶаҜЈ
=
аіҸ
а°®
а°·аіҸ
а°ӯ
аіҸа°ӯ
аіӣ
а°®
а°·аіӣ
а°ӯ
аҜЈ
а¬ө
= (10-15)/15Г·(3000-2500)/2500=-0.333/0.2=-1.655
28

10/2/2025
15
Calculation of Elasticity: Mid-Point Formula
пҒұElasticity should & must be the same whether prices rise or fall.
пҒұEconomists use the averages of prices and quantities under
consideration as reference points for determining percentage changes
in price and quantity.
пӮ§Price Elasticity of Demand:
пғјE
d
=(Change in Quantity Demanded/Average of Sum of Quantities
demanded)Г·(Change in price/Average of sum of Prices)
пғјE
d
= [Q
2
-Q
1
/ 0.5(Q
2
+Q
1
)]Г·[P
2
-P
1
/ 0.5(P
2
+P
1
)]
29
Mid-Point Formula (Using Averages): Example
Suppose an increase in price of beef from MK2,500/Kg to MK3,000 per
Kg has reduced quantity demanded from 15 Kilograms to 10 Kilograms
per week in Mudzi village.CalculatePrice Elasticity of Demand.
пӮ§E
d
= [Q
2
-Q
1
/ 0.5(Q
2
+Q
1
)]Г·[P
2
-P1/0.5(P
2
+P
1
)]
пӮ§E
d
= [10-15/ 0.5(10+15)]Г·[3000-2500/0.5(2500+3000)]
пӮ§E
d
= [-5/ 0.5(25)]Г·[500/0.5(5500)]
пӮ§E
d
= [-5/ 12.5)]Г·[500/2750]
пӮ§E
d
= [-.4]Г·[.18]
пӮ§E
d
= -2.2
30

10/2/2025
16
пҒұPrice Elasticity of Supply
пғјPrice elasticity of supply is the percentage change in quantity supplied divided
by the percentage change in price.
пғјSupply iselasticif the percentage change in quantity supplied isgreater than
the percentage change in price of the product. Elastic supply is whenES> 1
пғјSupply isinelasticif the percentage change in quantity supplied isless thanthe
percentage change in price of the product. Inelastic supply is whenES< 1
пҒұDeterminants of Elasticity of Supply
пғјTime period.
пӮ§If price of a commodity rises and the producers have enough time to make adjustment
in the level of output, the elasticity of supply will be more elastic.
пӮ§If the time period is short and the supply cannot be expanded after a price increase, the
supply is relatively inelastic.
пғјAbility to store output:Goods that be can be stored for long have relatively
elastic supply over goods that are perishable and that do not have storage
facilities.
31
пғјFactor mobility:If factors of production can be easily moved from one
use to another, it will affect elasticity of supply. The higher the mobility of
factors, the greater is the elasticity of supply of the goods and vice versa.
пғјChanges in marginal cost of production:If with expansion of output,
marginal cost increases and marginal revenue declines, the price elasticity
of supply will be less elastic(inelastic)
пғјExcess production capacity:When there is excess capacity and the
producer can increase output easily to take advantage of the rising prices,
the supply is more elastic.
32