

CASE STUDY ON BUSINESS IDEA 1 
AN IDEA FOR THE BIRDS!  
Thanaphol Virasa is a salesperson for a large Thai company. He has a bachelor’s degree in 
marketing and is one of the company’s best salespeople. It is likely that Thanaphol will one 
day become a sales manager if he stays with the company. However, he secretly hopes to 
start his own business. Since he was hired seven years ago, Thanaphol has managed to build 
a nest egg of 5 million Thai baht (about AUD$170 000). He is now looking for a business that 
would require no more than THB 2 million to get started. The rest would be used for 
operating capital and to keep him going until the company became profitable. In the past, 
Thanaphol has gathered ideas by reading magazines that report new types of businesses. 
Last week, Thanaphol read a story that intrigued him. A man on the Malaysian border has 
been building ‘bird houses’ so that anyone can get into the lucrative Chinese Bird’s Nest 
business. These bird houses are purpose-built, reinforced-concrete structures designed for 
swifts or swallows to build their nests. The white swiftlet’s bird’s nest is both a Chinese 
edible delicacy and a centuries-old Chinese medication (yan wo; yan ¼ swiftlet, wo ¼ nest). 
Swiftlets weave their nests from long, gooey saliva strands that come from glands under 
their tongues. The birds coil the threads of saliva into nests shaped like half a teacup. They 
attach them high off the ground against the walls of caves, abandoned apartments and now 
even small custom-built concrete bird houses. A bird’s nest factory can now be run by 
anyone as long as they are situated near the sea. Although the benefits of edible bird’s nests 
are still scientifically disputed, Bird’s Nest has been used for thousands of years in traditional 
Chinese medicine and cooking. Bird’s Nest is one of the most valued commodities on the 
market today, typically costing about AUD $4000 per kilogram. Currently these Bird’s Nest 
‘factories’ sell for THB 300 000 each. Thanaphol knows that few people can afford to pay this 
much for a bird house. He believes a market may exist for cheaper bird houses, in the range 
of THB 20 000 each. Thanaphol has done the research and believes it would not be too 
difficult to differentiate his product from the standard bird house with all the same 
functionality. The two biggest obstacles will be marketing and production; that is, getting 
people to order bird houses from him rather than copying the design and building it 
themselves. Thanaphol believes that, with his background, he can handle the marketing and 
it should not be too difficult to find someone to handle the construction. Moreover, until the 
business takes off, he believes he can continue with his sales job.  
QUESTIONS  
1 Is anything unique about Thanaphol’s idea? Explain.  
2 What is the first thing Thanaphol should do to follow up on his idea? Explain.  
3 When this is done, what else should Thanaphol do? Outline a general course of action for 
him. 