

GOVERNMENT OF MALAWI
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE 
EXTENSION AND ADVISORY 
SERVICES POLICY  
2025



2025
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE 
EXTENSION AND ADVISORY 
SERVICES POLICY 
GOVERNMENT OF MALAWI

MINISTRY OF AGRICULTURE  
P.O. BOX 30134
LILONGWE 3
MALAWI  
Tel: +265 1 789 033
Email: agriculture@agriculture.gov.mw
Website: https://agriculture.gov.mw/ 

Ministry of Agriculture | v
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
TABLE OF CONTENTS
FOREWORD .......................................................................................................................  vii
PREFACE ............................................................................................................................   ix
ACRONYMS ........................................................................................................................    x
GLOSSARY ......................................................................................................................... xii
CHAPTER 1: INTRODUCTION ..........................................................................................   1
1.1 Historical Background ...........................................................................................................     1
1.2 Current Status ..........................................................................................................................    3
1.3 Linkage with other relevant Policies and Legislation ............................................   5
1.4 Problem Statement  ..............................................................................................................     8
1.5 Purpose of the Policy ...........................................................................................................    8
CHAPTER 2:  BROAD POLICY DIRECTIONS ................................................................    
2.1 Policy Goal .................................................................................................................................    9
2.2 Policy Outcomes .....................................................................................................................    9
2.3 Policy Objectives ....................................................................................................................   9
2.4 Guiding Principles and Core Values ...............................................................................   10
CHAPTER 3: POLICY PRIORITY AREAS .......................................................................  11
3.1. Policy Priority Area 1: Agriculture Extension Capacity Development ...........    11
3.2. Policy Priority Area 2: Knowledge Management .....................................................   12
3.3. Policy Priority Area 3: Farmer Organisation and Empowerment ....................  14
3.4. Policy Priority Area 4: Agriculture Commercialisation and  
 Market Linkages  .....................................................................................................................  14
3.5. Policy Priority Area 5: Food and Nutrition .................................................................   15
3.6. Policy Priority Area 6: Youth and Agriculture Development .............................   16
3.7. Policy Priority Area 7: Cross Cutting Issues  .............................................................   17

vi | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
CHAPTER 4: IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS ..................................................  19
4.1  Institutional Arrangements  ...............................................................................................  19
4.2  Implementation Plan .............................................................................................................  23
4.3     Monitoring and Evaluation Plan ......................................................................................  23
ANNEXES ...........................................................................................................................  24
Annex 1: National Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services  
      Policy Implementation Plan .......................................................................................  25
Annex 2: Monitoring and Evaluation Plan ...............................................................................  33

Ministry of Agriculture | vii
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
FOREWORD
Government recognises the significant role extension and advisory services play in 
the promotion of agriculture transformation in the country. Government supports 
the contribution of the agriculture sector to Malawi’s socio–economic development. 
It  is  in  this  vein  that  the  Government  has  revised  the  old  National  Agriculture  
Extension and Advisory Services Policy (NAEASP) with the aim of providing a new 
policy direction.
The  revised  NAEASP  seeks  to  improve  the  delivery  of  extension  and  advisory  
services in Malawi to effectively support the contribution of the agriculture sector 
to  national  development.  The  Policy  is  necessary  to  guide  all  stakeholders  in  
agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  sub-sector  in  the  country  to  provide  
high  quality,  demand-driven,  inclusive  and  market-led  agriculture  extension  and  
advisory services.
The provision of agriculture extension and advisory services is currently challenged 
by  a  number  of  factors  such  as  poor  collaboration,  coordination  and  lack  of  
expertise and professionalism among service providers. This necessitates a robust 
policy framework that can inspire efficiency, effectiveness and professionalism of 
service providers for agriculture transformation in the country.
The revised NAEASP is aligned to the aspirations of the Malawi 2063, which is the 
overarching  development  blueprint  for  Malawi.  The  NAEASP  also  builds  on  the  
National Agriculture Policy.
The Government is strongly committed to translating the Policy into tangible actions 
and  services  to  promote  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  reforms  in  
the agriculture sector. I, therefore, appeal to stakeholders in the agriculture sector 
to be more proactive and vigilant in supporting implementation of the Policy for 
effective delivery of agriculture extension and advisory services in the country. 
Honourable Samuel Dalitso Kawale, M.P.
MINISTER OF AGRICULTURE



Ministry of Agriculture | ix
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
PREFACE
The  Government  acknowledges  that  improved  delivery  of  agriculture  extension  
and advisory services is fundamental to agricultural development in Malawi. This 
contributes  to  increased  agriculture  productivity  through  access  to  information,  
acquiring  knowledge  and  skills  for  implementing  research-proven  agriculture  
technologies  and  good  agriculture  practices  by  farmers  and  other  stakeholders.  
Improved  delivery  of  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  is  therefore  
instrumental in achieving the agriculture sector’s transformation goals of ensuring 
that  the  nation  enjoys  food,  income  and  nutrition  security.  The  importance  of  
agriculture extension to agriculture transformation necessitates the development 
and implementation of a robust Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services Policy 
in the country. 
The predecessor Agriculture Extension Policy namely “Agriculture Extension in the 
New  Millennium:  Towards  Pluralistic  and  Demand-driven  Services  in  Malawi”  was  
developed in the year 2000. The Ministry of Agriculture led a review of the Policy 
to address gaps and accommodate emerging issues in agriculture extension and 
advisory services at national and international levels. Implementation of the revised 
Policy will build on past successes including involvement of non-state actors   in 
the delivery of extension services and consequently increased financial resources 
for  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services.  However,  limited  coordination  
in  provision  of  services,  low  coverage  due  to  the  unavailability  of  qualified  staff,  
poor  marketing  arrangements,  and  unorganized  farmers  among  others  affected  
implementation of the old Policy and the revised Policy has put in place strategies 
to address these challenges. 
The  revised  Policy  has  been  developed  through  a  consultative  process  that  
involved key stakeholders such as Farmer Organisations (FOs), Non-Governmental 
Organisations (NGOs), the Private Sector and Government Ministries, Departments 
and Agencies  (MDAs). The Policy is aligned to the Malawi 2063 and its First 10-Year 
Implementation Plan (MIP-1) pillar of agriculture productivity and commercialisation. 
It is also linked to the National Agriculture Policy (NAP). At international level, the 
Policy contributes to realization of agreements as enshrined in the Comprehensive 
African  Agricultural  Development  Programme  (CAADP)  and  the  Sustainable  
Development Goals (SDGs). 
Dickxie Verson Kampani
SECRETARY FOR AGRICULTURE

x | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
ACRONYMS
ACB    : Agriculture Communication Branch
ADD   : Agricultural Development Division
ASP    : Area Stakeholder Panel
ASWAp : Agriculture Sector Wide Approach
BES    : Block Extension Systems
CAADP : Comprehensive African Agricultural Development Programme
CBO   : Community Based Organisation
COVID-19    : Corona Virus Disease of 2019
DAECC : District Agriculture Extension Coordinating Committee
DAESS : Decentralised Agriculture Extension Services System 
DHS    : Demographic Health Survey
DSP    : District Stakeholder Panel
EAD    : Environmental Affairs Department
EPA    : Extension Planning Area
FBO    : Farmer Based Organisation
FOs    : Farmer Organisations
FUM   : Farmers’ Union of Malawi
GDP    : Gross Domestic Product
GoM   : Government of Malawi
HIV/AIDS : Human Immunodeficiency Virus / Acquired Immune Deficiency      
    Syndrome
ICT     : Information and Communication Technologies
IRDP   : Integrated Rural Development Programmes
M&E    : Monitoring and Evaluation
MAFECO : Malawi Federation of Cooperatives
MBS    : Malawi Bureau of Standards
MCCCI : Malawi Confederation of Chambers of Commerce and Industry
MITC  : Malawi Investment and Trade Centre

Ministry of Agriculture | xi
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
MIP-1  : Malawi 2063 First 10-Year Implementation Plan 
MNS   : Multi-sector Nutrition Strategy
MoA   : Ministry of Agriculture
MoE    : Ministry of Energy
MoF    : Ministry of Finance
MoGCDSW  :Ministry of Gender, Community Development and Social Welfare
MoH   : Ministry of Health
MoI     : Ministry of Information and Digitalisation 
MoTI  : Ministry of Trade and Industry
MoJ    : Ministry of Justice
MoLGCU : Ministry of Local Government, Culture and Unity 
MoY  : Ministry of Youth and Sports
MSMEs : Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises
NAEASP : National Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services Policy
NAMIS : National Agriculture Management Information System
NAP    : National Agriculture Policy
NASFAM : National Smallholder Farmers’ Association of Malawi
NGOs  : Non-Governmental Organisations
NSP    : National Stakeholder Panel
RDP    : Rural Development Project
RTC    : Residential Training Centre
SDGs  : Sustainable Development Goals
SMEDI : Small and Medium Enterprises Development Institute
T&V    : Training and Visit System
TEVETA : Technical, Entrepreneurial and Vocational Education and Training

xii | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
GLOSSARY 
AgricultureThe art and science of growing crops and rearing 
livestock to provide food and other products. 
Agriculture ExtensionThe process of disseminating knowledge, skills, and 
technologies to farmers, agricultural workers and 
rural communities with the objective of sustainably 
improving agricultural productivity.
Demand-driven 
Extension
Extension services that allow clients to perform an 
active role in the identification of extension and 
advisory services required to respond to needs.
Extension AgentA person employed by a private or public 
organisation to assist farmers on various methods of 
farming.
Food and Nutrition 
Security
A situation where all people have reliable access 
to   a sufficient quantity of affordable, safe and 
nutritious food to meet their dietary needs.
Gender EqualityEntails the concept that all human beings, both 
men and women, are free to develop their personal 
abilities and make choices without the limitations 
set by stereotypes, rigid gender roles, or prejudices.
Market-Oriented 
Extension Services
Agriculture extension services that focus on 
supporting farmers to link and adapt to the needs of 
the market.
Non-State ActorIndividuals or organisations that provide agriculture 
extension and advisory services but are not 
necessarily part of government. These range from 
private extension providers, Farmer Organisations, 
Non-Governmental Organisations, agro-dealers, 
input suppliers.
Private SectorThis refers to the part of the national economy that 
is owned and run by private individuals or groups 
in order to generate profits and is not controlled by 
the state.

Ministry of Agriculture | 1
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
CHAPTER 1 
The  Government  of  Malawi  has  revised  the  National  Agriculture  Extension  and  
Advisory Services Policy (NAEASP) to provide a new policy direction and guidance 
on effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services for the next 
five years from 2025 to 2030. The Policy is premised on aspirations of providing 
quality  and  relevant  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  for  increased  
agriculture productivity and improved agriculture marketing. The implementation 
of the predecessor Policy on agriculture extension resulted in some positive changes 
of  attitude  and  practices  among  agriculture  stakeholders  towards  agriculture  
extension and advisory services. However, some gaps were noted in the Policy and 
have been addressed in the revised Policy.
The revised Policy identifies seven key priority areas in order to achieve its goal, 
outcomes and objectives. These priority areas are: Agriculture Extension Capacity 
Development; Knowledge Management; Farmer Organisation and Empowerment; 
Agriculture Commercialisation and Market Linkage; Food and Nutrition; Youth and 
Agriculture Development; and Cross Cutting Issues.
1.1 Historical Background  
In 1950, the Colonial Government reviewed prevailing agriculture policies to 
avoid a repeat of the 1948/1949 famine. The review defined agriculture policy 
objectives  and  one  of  which  was  the  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  
services. Relevant to agriculture extension was the development of a more 
coherent  national  extension  and  training  system.  The  system  provided  
farmers and extension workers with support at national, regional, divisional, 
district, sub-district and village levels. The system embraced four dimensions 
of agriculture development defined at that time as the ‘Master Farmer; Staff 
and Farmer Training; Public Relations Unit (PRU), Agriculture Communication 
Branch (ACB); and the National Soil and Water Conservation Unit. To achieve 
objectives  for  each  dimension,  the  agriculture  extension  system  employed  
coercive  approaches  up  to  the  time  Malawi  got  independence  from  the  
Colonial Government in 1964.
After Malawi’s independence, some elements of the extension system in force 
at that time were changed. The coercive approaches to agriculture extension 
services  were  replaced  with  more  educative  and  persuasive  approaches  
supported by agriculture radio programmes, agriculture extension aids and 
mobile  van  programmes.  The  ‘Master  Farmers’  approach  philosophy  was  
retained with slight changes from ‘Master Farmers’ to ‘Progressive Farmers’. 
One of the critiques that time was that the ‘Master Farmers’ approach served 
and  benefitted  relatively  few  farmers,  such  that  a  majority  of  the  farmers  
lacked access to agriculture extension and advisory services.
INTRODUCTION

2 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
In  response  to  the  highlighted  shortfall,  the  Government  of  Malawi  (GoM)  
conceived and implemented group approaches to reach out to more farmers 
through  the  ‘Integrated  Rural  Development  Programmes  (IRDP)’  between  
the  1970s  and  the  1980s.  The  group  approaches  to  agriculture  extension  
and  advisory  services  were  reinforced  in  1981.  During  that  period,  the  
Government adopted the modified Training and Visit (T&V) system known 
as  ‘Block  Extension  System  (BES)’.  The  dominant  feature  of  the  BES  was  
its top-down approach to agriculture extension and advisory services. This 
was characterised by Government domination in decision-making regarding 
farmers’ choices for enterprises and mode of production. The T&V system, 
therefore, left no room for farmer participation in decision-making regarding 
what  to  produce.  This  was  consistent  with  the  centralised  Government  
service provision and non-democratic political climate during those years.
The  adoption  of  democratic  governance  in  1993  led  to  decentralisation  
reforms  in  the  country,  and  reinforced  market  liberalisation  reforms  that  
had begun in the 1980s. Agriculture extension systems and approaches had 
to  reform  in  compliance  with  the  prevailing  socio-political  and  economic  
principles   of   development.   Some   global   and   national   institutions   of   
development  advocated  for  change  from  top-down  agriculture  extension  
systems  and  approaches  to  ‘Demand-Driven  and  Market-led’  systems  and  
approaches, hence the genesis of demand-driven agriculture extension and 
advisory services in Malawi during the decade spanning 1990 to 2000.
Beside  the  described  reforms  in  the  1990s,  many  Non-Governmental  
Organisations   (NGOs)   with   no   extension   orientation,   mainly   relief   
organisations redefined their interests to embrace agriculture extension as an 
alternative development pathway to working with Government and agrarian 
communities  in  Malawi.  These  stakeholders  began  providing  agriculture  
extension  and  advisory  services  through  community  and  Government  
established structures such as Agricultural Development Divisions (ADDs), 
Rural  Development  Projects  (RDPs),  Extension  Planning  Areas  (EPAs),  
Agriculture  Sections,  Agriculture  Blocks  and  Villages.  All  these  changes  
influenced  development  and  subsequent  adoption  of  the  Demand-Driven  
and Pluralistic Agriculture Extension Services Policy in the New Millennium of 
2000. The Policy was designed to support changes in attitudes and practices 
among service providers, financiers, and clients of agriculture extension and 
advisory services in Malawi.

Ministry of Agriculture | 3
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
1.2 Current Status 
Agriculture extension and advisory services remain pluralistic and demand-
driven.   Experiences   of   farmers   and   extension   service   providers   with   
pluralistic, demand-driven extension and advisory services have been both 
exciting and frustrating. Over 100 non-state organisations, including private 
companies,  Non-Governmental  Organisations  and  the  civil  society,  across  
the country are providing agriculture extension and advisory services. This 
development  has  created  opportunities  for  farmers  and  other  clients  to  
choose  their  preferred  extension  service  providers.  However,  analysis  of  
capacity  and  performance  of  agriculture  extension  service  providers  has  
revealed  a  number  of  challenges  including  use  of  unqualified  extension  
officers that has resulted in low standards. 
In  terms  of  programme  implementation,  there  is  weak  coordination  and  
harmonisation  of  interventions.  This  is  manifested  in  conflicting  messages  
for agriculture technologies, use of unapproved technologies, and inability of 
clients to participate in decision-making on innovations. Financial resources 
are made available to support implementation of agriculture extension and 
advisory  services,  however,  there  is  weak  accountability  on  utilisation  of  
resources by service providers.
The public sector has the technical capacity to provide agriculture extension 
and advisory services because most of the staff have undergone professional 
development training from government accredited institutions. On the other 
hand, most extension staff from other private companies, Non-Governmental 
Organisations and the civil society lack basic professional training in provision 
of agriculture extension and advisory services. Despite Government having 
relatively well qualified staff compared to other organisations, staffing levels 
in  the  public  sector  have  remained  low  and  this  is  reflected  in  the  current  
high farmer to extension worker ratio which ranges between 1:2,500-3,000 
against the recommended ratio of 1:750. This challenge is further compounded 
by  haphazard  use  of  Government  agriculture  extension  staff  by  non-state  
actors, hence derailing implementation of Government agriculture extension 
programmes.
The public sector has a network of agriculture extension and advisory services 
infrastructure across the country, which play a vital role in the provision of 
standard  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  to  farmers.  Over  the  
years, public agriculture extension infrastructure has been heavily dilapidated 
due to poor management and non-maintenance. This has somehow weakened 
provision of agriculture extension and advisory services to farmers. At times, 
staff retention rate has been negatively affected by low working morale with 
extension staff houses and offices in dilapidated and poor state. In addition 
to  dilapidated  infrastructure,  there  is  poor  mobility  of  frontline  agriculture  
extension staff, which negatively affects timely delivery of their services. This 
is due to the fact that most agriculture extension workers are still using push 
bikes and are unable to serve more farmers and those in hard-to-reach areas.

4 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Agriculture   commercialisation   remains   largely   under-developed   in   the   
country  because  emphasis  has  been  on  improving  agriculture  production  
and productivity with little emphasis on strategic agribusiness development. 
This  is  further  constrained  by  poor  market  systems  as  trading  of  most  
agriculture commodities is through unstructured and unregulated markets.  
Medium  and  large-scale  farmers  remain  un-serviced  because  there  are  no  
dedicated agriculture extension and advisory services due to emphasis on 
support to smallholder farmers. 
Most  of  the  farmers  operate  as  individuals  with  limited  technical  and  
management capacity. As individuals, they have limited access to agriculture 
extension and advisory services and fail to participate in agriculture markets. 
Most Farmer Organisations (FOs) currently fail to access and provide services 
to their members due to organisational challenges and limited capacity to 
do so in other cases.
Currently,  there  is  growing  interest  among  agriculture  extension  service  
providers  to  improve  women,  youth,  persons  with  disabilities  and  other  
vulnerable groups’ participation in decision-making and implementation of 
agriculture development programmes and projects. However, women, youth, 
persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups have low access to, and 
control over agriculture production resources and services such as extension, 
farm implements, technology, inputs, land and credit as compared to men. In 
addition, their participation in decision-making in farmer organisations and 
institutions is limited. 
Other crossing cutting issues such as HIV/AIDS and climate change continue 
to  pose  a  serious  challenge  in  the  delivery  of  agriculture  extension  and  
advisory services in Malawi. Climate change and variability cause significant 
losses  in  agriculture  production,  hence  the  need  for  agriculture  extension  
and advisory services to play a role in adapting to, and mitigating its impact.  

Ministry of Agriculture | 5
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
1.3 Linkage with other relevant Policies and 
Legislation 
The National Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services Policy (NAEASP) 
is linked to other key policies and pieces of legislation as follows:  
a. National Policies and Strategies  
i. The Malawi 2063 and its First 10-Year Implementation Plan (MIP-1): 
NAEASP is aligned to broad development goals and vision for Malawi 
as articulated in the Malawi 2063 and its First 10-Year Implementation 
Plan.  In  the  Malawi  2063,  the  Policy  contributes  to  the  attainment  
of  the  outcomes  and  objectives  of  the  agriculture  productivity  
and  commercialisation  pillar.  Specifically,  this  Policy  contributes  to  
attaining the vision by developing an effective agriculture extension 
and advisory services system.
ii. National  Agriculture  Policy:  NAEASP  recognises  importance  of  
enhancing  provision  of  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  
delivery  for  the  attainment  of  the  six  priority  areas  of  the  National  
Agriculture Policy.
iii. National    Multi-Sector    Nutrition    Policy:    NAEASP    promotes    
implementation  of  nutrition  sensitive  agriculture  programmes  and  
gender  equality,  equity,  protection,  participation  and  empowerment  
for  improved  nutrition  that  will  directly  contribute  to  attainment  of  
goals of the National Multi-Sector Nutrition Policy.
iv. National   Gender   Policy:   The   National   Gender   Policy   aims   at   
mainstreaming gender in the national development process in order to 
enhance participation of women, men, girls, and boys for sustainable 
and equitable development. NAEASP highlights the key strategies on 
gender mainstreaming to be implemented in the agriculture sector.
v.  National Youth Policy: The goal of the National Youth Policy is to create 
an enabling environment for youth to develop to their full potential in 
order to contribute significantly to personal and sustainable national 
development. NAEASP provides guidance on the matter of agriculture 
extension for the respective strategies of the National Youth Policy to 
fully benefit the youth in agriculture. 
vi. National   Decentralisation   Policy:   The   National   Decentralisation   
Policy promotes devolution of decision-making powers to the people 
at  local  level.  NAEASP  promotes  development  and  strengthening  
of  decentralised  extension  service  delivery  in  line  with  the  National  
Decentralisation Policy. 
vii. National Trade Policy: NAEASP is aligned to the National Trade Policy 
in  that  it  flags  and  provides  guidance  on  marketing  of  agricultural  
produce. 
viii. National Climate Change Management Policy: NAEASP draws from 
the National Climate Change Management Policy to provide practical 
guidance on operationalisation of various actions to address climate 
change issues in the agriculture sector.

6 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
ix. National  ICT  Policy:  NAEASP  is  aligned  to  the  National  ICT  Policy  
in that it provides guidelines regarding operationalisation of the ICT-
based services in agriculture extension and advisory services for this 
country.
x. National Irrigation Policy: NAEASP is linked to the National Irrigation 
Policy in that it provides a framework for integrating irrigation-related 
initiatives  into  broader  agricultural  extension  programmes  such  as  
training   and   capacity   building,   technical   assistance,   information   
dissemination and access to resources by all farmers disaggregated 
by gender.
xi. Agriculture Land Resources Management Policy: NAEASP is aligned 
to the Agriculture Land Resources Management Policy in that it will 
encourage  the  production  of  a  variety  of  nutritious  and  safe  foods  
on  agricultural  land  in  a  sustainable  manner.  This  will  ensure  the  
continued  production  of  diverse,  nutritious,  and  safe  foods  through  
the  participation  of  women  and  vulnerable  groups  in  agricultural  
programmes.
xii. National  Livestock  Development  Policy:  NAEASP  is  aligned  to  the  
National Livestock Development Policy in that it provides guidance in 
livestock innovation, technology development and dissemination and 
calls  for  empowerment  of  the  youth,  women  and  other  vulnerable  
groups in livestock sub-sector.
xiii. National Fertiliser Policy: NAEASP is aligned to the National Fertiliser 
Policy in that it addresses issues of capacity building for frontline staff 
and farmers to improve best practices for fertiliser use efficiency and 
profitability.
xiv. National Seed Policy: NAEASP is aligned to the National Seed Policy 
in  that  it  promotes  farmers’  access  to  and  education  on  improved  
high-quality seeds that maximises yield.
xv. National Export Strategy II (NES II): NAEASP is aligned to the NES 
II  in  that  it  supports  capacity  building  for  expansion  of  supply  of  
agricultural products from farmers. 
xvi. National  Community  Development  Policy:  The  NAEASP  is  aligned  
to  the  National  Community  Development  Policy  in  that  it  promotes  
consumption of diversified and nutritious foods.
b. Legal Instruments 
i. The Constitution: NAEASP is aligned to Chapter 3:13 of the Constitution 
of the Republic of Malawi in that among others, it promotes gender 
equality and adequate nutrition.
ii. Local  Government  Act  (CAP  22:01):    NAEASP  is  aligned  to  the  
Local  Government  Act  in  that  it  delegates  authority  to  the  local  
governments to provide Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services 
through formulation of by-laws in accordance with other related laws.

Ministry of Agriculture | 7
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
iii. Environmental Management Act (CAP 60:02): NAEASP is aligned to 
the  Environmental  Management  Act  in  that  it  provides  for  capacity  
building for the protection and management of the environment and 
proper utilisation of natural resources.    
c. International Agreements and Protocols 
NAEASP  is  linked  to  international  agreements  and  protocols.  Some  of  
them are as follows:
i. United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SGDs): NAEASP is 
linked to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) 
number  1,  no  poverty;  number  2,  zero  hunger;  number  5,  gender  
equality;  number  6,  clean  water  and  sanitation;  number  8,  decent  
work and economic growth; number 12, responsible consumption and 
production; and number 13, climate action. 
ii. African Union Agenda 2063:  NAEASP is linked to the African Union 
Agenda 2063; 
Goal number 2 - end hunger to achieve food security and improved 
nutrition and promote sustainable agriculture; 
Goal  number  5  -  achieve  gender  equality  and  empower  all  women  
and girls; 
Goal  number  12  -  ensure  sustainable  consumption  and  production  
patterns; and; 
Goal number 13 - take urgent action to combat climate change and 
its impacts.
iii. Comprehensive   African   Agricultural   Development   Programme      
(CAADP):  NAEASP  is  directly  aligned  to  all  the  four  pillars  of  the  
CAADP   specifically   through   provision   of   Agricultural   Support   
Services, Capacity Development, Multi-Stakeholder Partnerships and 
Agricultural Extension and Advisory Services.
iv. The Southern African Development Community Regional Agricultural 
Policy (SADC-RAP): NAEASP is aligned to the SADC-RAP in that it 
contributes  to  the  attainment  of  enhancing  sustainable  agricultural  
production,   productivity   and   competitiveness   objective   through   
increased  farmer  adoption  of  sustainable  agriculture  technologies  
and innovation.

8 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
1.4 Problem Statement 
The   provision   of   agriculture   extension   and   advisory   services   is   still   
experiencing  challenges  despite  implementation  of  the  previous  Policy,  
“Agriculture  Extension  Policy  in  the  New  Millennium”.  The  review  of  the  
previous Policy revealed inadequate human resources, inadequate and poor 
transport facilities for frontline staff, poor extension infrastructure, equipment 
and  poor  management  and  coordination  of  extension  services  among  
stakeholders. It also revealed low financing, weak regulatory framework, weak 
farmer  organisation,  under-developed  agriculture  value  chains  and  market  
linkages,  inadequate  dietary  diversification,  low  participation  of  youth  in  
agriculture, gender and social inclusion issues, climate change and increased 
environmental management challenges among farmers and stakeholders. 
To alleviate the above-mentioned problems, the Government and its partners 
is implementing a number of interventions to improve delivery of agricultural 
extension  and  advisory  services;  however,  this  is  done  in  an  environment  
where  the  guiding  policy  is  not  adequately  addressing  current  emerging  
issues as it was developed long ago, in the year 2000.
1.5 Purpose of the Policy  
Agriculture extension and advisory services play pivotal role in most aspects 
of  agriculture  development  that  necessitates  a  robust  extension  policy  
direction  to  inspire  efficiency  and  effectiveness  of  service  providers  for  
agriculture  transformation.  The  Policy,  therefore,  provides  a  framework  for  
maximising agriculture extension clients’ access to high-quality and relevant 
services; and promotes collaboration among service providers and clients for 
increased adoption of agriculture technologies, good agriculture practices, 
good agribusiness management practices, and marketing to inspire increased 
production and productivity for the food, nutrition, and income security in 
Malawi.
This  Policy  broadens  the  agenda  of  agricultural  extension  and  advisory  
interventions from a mere focus and obsession with agriculture production 
with  smallholder  farmers  to  a  broader  range  of  interventions  including  
emerging and commercial farmers.

Ministry of Agriculture | 9
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
CHAPTER 2   
2.1 Policy Goal
The goal of the National Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services Policy is 
to develop and promote quality farmer and client-driven inclusive agriculture 
extension  and  advisory  services  for  increased  and  sustainable  agriculture  
productivity, household and national income and nutrition security.
2.2 Policy Outcomes
The Policy has the following outcomes:  
i. Increased  farmer  adoption  of  sustainable  agriculture  technologies  and  
innovation;
ii. Improved dietary diversification among farmers of all gender categories;
iii. Improved socio-economic status of women, youth and other vulnerable 
groups in agriculture; and
iv. Increased agro-based incomes of farmers and other value chain actors.
2.3 Policy Objectives
The objectives of the Policy are to:
i. Build institutional and human professional and management capacity for 
effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services;
ii. Promote  implementation  of  innovative  and  digital  agriculture  extension  
systems and approaches;
iii. Increase  farmers’  access  to  appropriate  and  up-to-date  agriculture  
extension and advisory services;
iv. Improve  coordination  and  collaboration  in  the  provision  of  agriculture  
extension and advisory services among stakeholders; 
v. Increase agro-processing, value addition and access to reliable agriculture 
markets; 
vi. Increase availability and consumption of diversified and nutritious foods 
among farming households; and 
vii. Increase access, ownership and control over productive agriculture assets 
and benefits by women, youth and other vulnerable groups. 
BROAD POLICY DIRECTIONS

10 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
2.4  Guiding Principles and Core Values 
The  implementation  of  the  National  Agriculture  Extension  and  Advisory  
Services Policy is guided by the following principles and core values:
i. Accountability:  Providers  of  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  
services shall be obliged and willing to accept their responsibility for 
their action, decisions, and the resulting consequences to clients and 
other stakeholders. 
ii. User-Pay:  The  Government  is  obliged  to  provide  public  goods  and  
services.  Clients  of  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services,  
however, are expected to contribute to goods and services that are 
private in nature to ensure fairness, equity, and efficiency in resource 
allocation and to promote accountability among users for successful 
implementation of the current Policy.
iii. Equity:   Provision  of  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  
will  ensure  the  upholding  of  fairness  and  justice  across  different  
stakeholders.
iv. Equality: Agriculture extension and advisory services providers shall 
not discriminate against farmers or any other stakeholder on grounds 
of  race,  colour,  sex,  language,  religion,  political  or  other  opinion,  
nationality,  ethnic  or  social  origin,  disability,  property,  birth  or  other  
status.
v. Pluralism: Government shall allow many players with right professional 
capacity to perform their appropriate roles in provision of agriculture 
extension  and  advisory  services  within  the  government’s  stipulated  
standards and country’s legal framework.
vi. Professionalism: All service providers shall demonstrate commitment 
to  excellence,  integrity  and  respect  in  the  provision  of  agriculture  
extension  and  advisory  services,  leading  to  trust,  credibility  and  
success. 
vii. Participatory: Stakeholders  shall  be  actively  involved  in  decision-
making  and  action  to  ensure  that  the  Policy  is  relevant,  responsive  
and inclusive. This will promote ownership and sustainability.
viii. Result-Oriented: Emphasis will focus on achieving specific outcomes 
and impacts from extension activities.
ix. Budget  Alignment:  Agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  
budgets shall be aligned to the Policy priority areas.

Ministry of Agriculture | 11
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
CHAPTER 3
The National Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services Policy has seven priority 
areas namely: 
1. Agriculture Extension Capacity Development;
2. Knowledge Management;
3. Farmer Organisation and Empowerment;
4. Agriculture Commercialisation and Market Linkages;
5. Food and Nutrition;
6. Youth and Agriculture Development; and 
7.   Cross Cutting Issues.
3.1. Policy Priority Area 1: Agriculture Extension 
Capacity Development
Agriculture  extension  capacity  development  involves  training  and  building  
capabilities of agricultural extension personnel to help improve agricultural 
production and productivity. The Government of Malawi and its stakeholders 
support  well-established  institutions  and  systems  of  delivering  agriculture  
extension  and  advisory  services.  This  is  primarily  done  through  a  network  
of  Government  extension  workers  with  specialties  in  different  fields  of  
agriculture placed in strategic areas to support farmers across the country. 
The empowered institutions play a great role in operationalisation of demand-
driven   agriculture   extension   and   advisory   services   through   planning,   
implementation and monitoring and evaluation of agriculture programmes.
Provision  of  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  in  the  country,  
however,  is  facing  both  institutional  and  human  resources  challenges  that  
adversely affect efficient and effective execution of agriculture programmes. 
Despite Government efforts to improve the capacity of agriculture extension 
services, there is still inadequate infrastructure; equipment; human resources; 
skills  and  mobility  for  frontline  staff;  weak  coordination  and  management;  
inadequate  financing  of  agricultural  extension  programmes  and  weak  
regulatory  framework  for  effective  delivery  of  agriculture  extension  and  
advisory services. 
POLICY PRIORITY AREAS

12 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Policy  Statement  1:  The  Policy  will  ensure  that  agriculture  extension  
institutions and infrastructure are developed to enhance their efficiency 
and effectiveness
Strategies
i. Promote  agriculture  extension  institutions  to  support  planning  and  
implementation of services;
ii. Improve  coordination  and  management  of  agriculture  extension  and  
advisory services;
iii. Promote modern infrastructure development;
iv. Improve   regulatory   framework   for   effective   delivery   of   agriculture   
extension and advisory services;
v. Improve mobility of agriculture extension and advisory services officers 
at all levels;
vi. Promote agriculture innovation system; 
vii. Promote private extension services; and
viii. Strengthen various mechanisms for financing extension programmes.
Policy   Statement   2:   The   Policy   will   ensure   that   staff   development   
programmes  to  continuously  address  needs  of  clients  in  the  dynamic  
agriculture extension and advisory services sub-sector are advocated
Strategies
i. Enhance staffing of agricultural extension and advisory services providers; 
and 
ii. Strengthen professional, technical and managerial capacity of agriculture 
extension and advisory services providers.
3.2. Policy Priority Area 2: Knowledge Management
Knowledge  management  is  a  systematic  process  of  capturing,  organising,  
distributing  and  effectively  using  knowledge  and  information  to  improve  
agricultural  practices,  enhanced  decision-making  and  foster  innovation  
among farmers, extension workers and other relevant stakeholders. Proper 
presentation  of  information  about  new  technologies  is  important  for  
effective dissemination of the technologies to farmers for their appreciation 
and  understanding.  Knowledge  and  information  are  essential  for  farmers  
to  successfully  respond  to  opportunities  and  challenges  in  the  agriculture  
sector. Thus, technology packaging and dissemination ensure that new and 
important  information  about  modern  farming  technologies  and  markets  is  
delivered to farmers in a clear and simple form. 

Ministry of Agriculture | 13
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Analysis  of  the  current  situation  reveals  that  adoption  of  technologies  by  
farmers  is  relatively  low.  Some  technologies’  messages  are  not  properly  
packaged  for  dissemination  and  as  a  result,  there  is  limited  information  
among  the  farmers.  There  are  many  less  informed  farmers  due  to  poor  
access to agriculture information, use of messages that are not tailored for 
specific  beneficiaries  and  under  utilisation  of  Information  Communication  
Technologies  (ICTs).  Besides,  a  lack  of  a  knowledge  management  system  
results in poor servicing of farmers and tracking of the impact of disseminated 
messages. The situation has been brought about due to poor linkage between 
researchers and extension agents. 
Policy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that knowledge management is 
improved to ease presentation, understanding and delivery of extension 
and advisory services
Strategies 
i. Promote   research-extension-farmer   linkages   at   different   levels   of   
implementation;
ii. Improve  knowledge  of  technologies  among  agriculture  extension  and  
advisory services providers; and
iii. Promote farmer access to well-packaged technologies’ messages through 
different methods and techniques.
Policy Statement 2: The Policy will ensure that dissemination of different 
technologies using ICT and interpersonal media is enhanced for increased 
adoption
Strategies 
i. Promote  ICT-based  extension  and  advisory  services  for  accelerated  
access to technologies;
ii. Facilitate development and dissemination of diverse and farmer-tailored 
agriculture messages;
iii. Enhance participatory development of agriculture messages;
iv. Enhance  the  delivery  of  agriculture  messages  through  interpersonal  
methods; and
v. Promote the use of locally adapted communication strategies.
Policy statement 3: The Policy will ensure that effective data capturing, 
processing and storage of available information on different technologies 
at all levels is promoted
Strategies 
i. Strengthen capturing, processing and documentation of agriculture data 
and information; 
ii. Strengthen  linkages  and  networking  among  extension  stakeholders  in  
knowledge management; and
iii. Improve access to timely agriculture information and technologies.

14 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
3.3. Policy Priority Area 3: Farmer Organisation and 
Empowerment
Farmer  organisation  refers  to  a  collective  group  of  farmers  who  come  
together  to  achieve  common  goals  related  to  their  agriculture  activities.  
These  include  farmer  clubs,  cooperatives,  anchor  farmers,  associations  
and  any  other  grouping  of  farmers.  Well-developed  farmer  organisations  
facilitate  the  use  of  social  and  human  capital  for  agriculture  development.  
The organisations ease farmers’ access to agriculture extension and advisory 
services as well as input and output markets. Besides, they encourage the 
sharing of messages, information, knowledge and skills among members of 
the organisations.
Currently, most farmers work individually, as a result, they have limited access 
to  agriculture  information  and  extension  services.  This  constrains  farmers’  
participation  in  agriculture  value  chains.  In  addition,  they  have  limited  
bargaining power to negotiate for better services including marketing. 
Policy  Statement:  The  Policy  will  ensure  that  capacity  development  
programmes for farmers and their organisations are implemented
Strategies
i. Facilitate  formation  and  development  of  farmer  groups  into  business-
oriented farmer organisations; 
ii. Enhance  capacity  of  farmers  to  organise,  mobilise,  engage  service  
providers for agriculture extension and auxiliary services;
iii. Strengthen technical and managerial capacity of farmer organisations; 
iv. Promote  participation  of  youth,  women  and  other  vulnerable  gender  
categories in farmer organisations management; and
v. Promote  public  private  partnerships  on  farmer  organisation  capacity  
development.
3.4. Policy Priority Area 4: Agriculture 
Commercialisation and Market Linkages 
Agriculture  commercialisation  and  market  linkages  enhance  value  chain  
players’  ability  to  intensify  use  of  productivity-enhancing  technologies  to  
achieve  maximum  output  for  markets  and  consumption.  Both  facilitate  
investments  in  production,  agro-processing,  transportation,  storage  and  
warehousing. 
Agriculture commercialisation and market linkages remain under-developed 
in  the  country  because  of  emphasis  on  promoting  adoption  of  agriculture  
technologies  among  smallholder  subsistence  farmers.  As  a  result,  there  is  
little emphasis on promoting agriculture extension strategies that promote 
mass production, agro-processing, storage and warehousing of agriculture 
commodities. This is aggravated by low staff capacity to provide agriculture 
extension and advisory services to emerging and commercial farmers.

Ministry of Agriculture | 15
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Policy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that agriculture 
commercialisation is promoted
Strategies 
i. Build  staff  capacity  in  agriculture  extension  approaches  and  methods  
that promote market-led mass production, agro-processing, storage and 
warehousing of agriculture commodities;
ii. Enhance private sector investments in agribusiness including mega farms;
iii. Develop innovative financial products for farmers of all gender categories;
iv. Promote   agri-preneurship   among   farmers   of   all   gender   categories   
including youth and other value chain actors; 
v. Build  institutional  and  farmer  capacity  in  agro-processing  and  value  
addition; and 
vi. Promote access to financial services by farmers of all gender categories.
Policy  Statement  2:    The  Policy  will  ensure  that  markets  and  market  
linkages are in place
Strategies 
i. Promote development of agriculture market infrastructure;
ii. Strengthen  contract  farming  arrangements  between  producers  and  
buyers;
iii. Build capacity of staff and farmer organisation in marketing; and
iv. Promote development of regulated markets and market linkages.
3.5. Policy Priority Area 5: Food and Nutrition
Adequate  nutrition  is  essential  for  all  Malawians  and  is  achieved  when  
the  food  consumed  can  provide  all  the  nutrients  to  meet  the  daily  body  
requirements. The agriculture sector has the mandate of ensuring adequate 
dietary intake for all, especially the vulnerable groups through programmes 
that promote stable availability, access, proper processing, preservation and 
consumption  of  diversified,  safe  and  nutritious  foods  from  all  the  six  food  
groups. This Policy will ensure that agriculture investments and productivity 
translate into improved nutrition outcomes. 
Over the past two decades, progress has been made in improving nutrition 
status  suggesting  that  investment  in  nutrition  in  Malawi  is  paying  off.  For  
instance, the percentage of children under five years of age who are stunted 
decreased  from  47.1%  to  37.1%  according  to  the  2015/2016  Demographic  
Health  Survey  (DHS).  Similarly,  the  prevalence  of  vitamin  A  deficiency  
decreased  from  59%  to  4%  (Malawi  Micronutrient  Survey  –  MNS  2015/16).  
Despite  the  registered  improvements,  there  is  still  poor  progress  in  other  
nutrition  indicators  such  as  minimum  acceptable  diet.  Achieving  adequate  
dietary  intake  has  been  a  challenge  due  to  low  availability  and  access  to  
diverse nutritious foods and low education levels.

16 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Policy  Statement:  The  Policy  will  ensure  that  interventions  on  nutrition  
education and surveillance are promoted
Strategies
i. Promote diversified production of nutritious and safe foods;
ii. Promote food safety technologies that reduce post-harvest losses in food 
production, preservation, processing and storage;
iii. Scale-up nutrition education and behaviour change; 
iv. Enhance improved dietary practices; and 
v. Strengthen food surveillance system for effective implementation of the 
food and nutrition programme.
3.6. Policy Priority Area 6: Youth and Agriculture 
Development
Malawi’s  population  highly  constitutes  the  youth  who  are  generally  more  
open  to  adopting  new  technologies  and  innovative  practices.  Integrating  
modern  technologies  into  agriculture  to  attract  youth  participation  can  
boost productivity and sustainability.
The agriculture sector is often perceived as labor-intensive, low-paying and 
lacking in innovation, which deters young people. This is further escalated by 
the scarcity of extension and advisory services tailored to their needs. 
Policy  Statement:  The  Policy  will  ensure  that  youth  participation  in  
agriculture extension and advisory services and development programmes 
is promoted
Strategies
i. Promote effective youth involvement and decision-making in agriculture 
programmes;
ii. Support training for out-of-school youth in agricultural production, agro-
processing and marketing;
iii. Promote  modernisation  of  agriculture  through  introduction  of  modern  
farming technologies to attract the youth;
iv. Promote business incubation centres for youth in agriculture; and
v. Support agriculture technical vocational education training for youth.

Ministry of Agriculture | 17
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
3.7. Policy Priority Area 7: Cross Cutting Issues  
Cross cutting issues refer to broad, overarching factors that affect all aspects 
of  agricultural  development  and  extension  services.  The  Policy  identifies  
three  key  cross  cutting  issues  in  the  delivery  of  agriculture  extension  and  
advisory services. These are Gender; HIV and AIDS; and Climate Change and 
Environment.
High gender disparities among different gender categories slows agricultural 
growth.  Statistics  indicate  that  women  perform  over  70%  of  agriculture  
tasks  and  produce  80%  of  food  consumed  at  household  level.  Despite  
their  contribution,  women  and  other  vulnerable  groups  continue  to  be  
disadvantaged in multiple ways. Women have limited access to ownership 
and control over productive assets and benefits in the sector. On the other 
hand,  HIV  and  AIDS  has  exacerbated  existing  agriculture  development  
challenges where women are more affected by the pandemic than men due 
to unequal power relations and unequal division of labour. As such, women 
and  other  vulnerable  groups  are  unable  to  effectively  contribute  to  food,  
nutrition and income security.
The  growing  demand  for  food  as  a  result  of  the  increasing  population  
require intensification and the clearing of forest land in order to grow crops 
and rear livestock to meet the food and income requirements. This coupled 
with weak land and soil management practices has resulted in deforestation 
and  increasing  temperatures  resulting  in  frequent  incidences  of  droughts  
and  floods  which  result  in  loss  of  assets,  shortage  of  food  and  unsafe  
drinking water. This pushes the most vulnerable groups to turn to negative 
and  unsustainable  coping  mechanisms  like  charcoal  burning  and  selling  of  
production resources. 
Policy statement 1: The Policy will ensure that gender, HIV and AIDS are 
integrated in the agriculture extension and advisory services 
Strategies 
i. Promote  access,  ownership  and  control  over  productive  resources  for  
women and other vulnerable groups;
ii. Promote agriculture education and technical training for women, persons 
with disabilities and other vulnerable groups;
iii. Support  agribusiness  entrepreneurship  among  women,  persons  with  
disabilities and other vulnerable groups;
iv. Facilitate  access  to  finance  for  women  and  other  vulnerable  groups  in  
agriculture;
v. Promote  participation  of  women  and  vulnerable  groups  in  agriculture  
and environment management programmes;
vi. Promote  agriculture  programmes  and  projects  that  are  responsive  to  
gender and HIV and AIDS at the workplace and community levels; and
vii. Prioritize capacity development for gender and HIV responsive extension 
for all staff and farmers in the agriculture sector.  

18 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Policy  statement  2:  The  Policy  will  ensure  that  climate  change  and  
environment  are  integrated  in  the  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  
services 
Strategy 
Promote implementation of Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) among farmers 
of all gender categories.

Ministry of Agriculture | 19
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
CHAPTER 4
4.1  Institutional Arrangements 
The   National   Agriculture   Extension   and   Advisory   Services   Policy   is   
implemented by various stakeholders with varying roles and responsibilities 
as follows:
i. The Office of the President and Cabinet
The Office of the President and Cabinet is responsible for provision of 
overall direction and guidance in the implementation, monitoring, and 
review of the Policy.
ii. Ministry responsible for Agriculture
The Ministry is responsible for: 
a.  Ensuring  coordination  and  collaboration  with  other  key  service  
providers and stakeholders during implementation; 
b.  Coordinating  and  ensuring  that  standards  in  the  provision  of  
agriculture  extension  and  advisory  services  are  set  and  enforced  
for professional and quality services; and 
c.  Supervising,  monitoring  and  evaluating  implementation  of  this  
Policy.
iii. Ministry responsible for Trade  
The Ministry is responsible for ensuring that agriculture 
commercialisation including trade facilitation, and cooperative 
development interventions are implemented alongside other extension 
and advisory services.
iv. Ministry responsible for Industry  
The Ministry is responsible for ensuring that agriculture 
commercialisation including enterprise development, value addition 
and related investments are made to respond to demand for these in 
agriculture extension and advisory services.
v. Ministry responsible for Local Government
The Ministry is responsible for:
a. Coordinating with the Ministry of Agriculture and local authorities 
for  effective  implementation  of  the  decentralization  drive  at  local  
level; and
b. Creating an enabling environment for smooth operationalisation of 
agriculture extension and advisory services at local level.
IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS

20 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
vi. Ministry responsible for Justice
The Ministry is responsible for:
a. Guiding development of the regulatory framework to ensure that it 
is compliant with Malawi’s laws; and 
b.   Drafting,   reviewing   and   amending   agriculture   extension   and   
advisory services legislations.
vii. Ministry responsible for Lands
The Ministry is responsible for providing clients, especially farmers, with 
policy guidance on land related matters such as interpretation of land 
laws which require coordinated sensitisation to farming community.
viii. Ministry responsible for Finance 
The Ministry is responsible for:
a.   Financing   public   agriculture   extension   and   advisory   services   
programmes; and
b.   Facilitating   and   monitoring   resource   mobilisation   for   public   
agriculture extension and advisory services programmes
ix.  Ministry responsible for Economic Planning and Development
The Ministry is responsible for:
a. Facilitating development and appraisal of agriculture extension and 
advisory services programmes/projects; and
b. Data collection and analysis through National Statistical Office.
x.  Ministry responsible for Gender and Community Services
The Ministry is responsible for providing policy direction and oversight 
on gender, community development and social welfare. 
xi.  Ministry responsible for Health 
The Ministry is responsible for providing policy and technical guidance 
on  health  issues  especially  on  nutrition  and  HIV  and  AIDS  and  other  
pandemics like COVID-19.
xii.  Ministry responsible for Education
The Ministry is responsible for coordinating educational and research 
issues especially with the academia and training institutions.
xiii. Ministry responsible for Labour 
The Ministry is responsible for coordinating and supporting technical, 
vocational   and   entrepreneurship   interventions   to   enhance   youth   
participation in agribusiness development projects and programmes.
xiv. Ministry responsible for Youth 
The  Ministry  is  responsible  for  coordinating  promotion  of  youth  
participation  in  agribusiness  by  collaborating  with  the  Ministry  of  
Agriculture and stakeholders in the agriculture sector.

Ministry of Agriculture | 21
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
xv. Ministry    responsible    for    Environment,    Climate    Change    and    
Meteorological Services
The Ministry is responsible for: 
a.  Provision  of  up-to-date  climate  and  weather-related  information;  
and 
b. Provision of technical expertise to develop, promote, raise awareness 
and  monitor  the  formulation,  implementation,  and  reporting  of  
intervention on environment, natural resources and climate change 
including carbon trading. 
xvi. Department responsible for Human Resource and Management
The Department is responsible for:
a. Facilitating recruitment of public agriculture extension and advisory 
services staff;
b.   Facilitating   development   of   public   agriculture   extension   and   
advisory services staff; and
c. Conducting functional review of agriculture extension and advisory 
services.
xvii. Department responsible for Statutory Corporation
The   Department   is   responsible   for   effective   participation   of   all   
agriculture  related  parastatals  in  agricultural  extension  and  advisory  
services   programmes   including   Agriculture   Development   Market   
Corporation  (ADMARC),  Smallholder  Farmers’  Fertilizer  Revolving  
Fund of Malawi (SFFRFM) and National Food Reserve Agency (NFRA).
xviii. National Planning Commission
The National Planning Commission is responsible for:
a. Incorporating issues on Agriculture Extension Services in medium 
term development plans; and
b. Overseeing implementation of the National Agriculture Extension 
and Advisory Services Policy.
xix. National Commission for Science and Technology
The National Commission for Science and Technology is responsible for:
a. Promoting, supporting, coordinating and regulating research; and 
b. Development and application of science and technology.   
xx. Malawi Investment and Trade Centre (MITC)
The Centre is responsible for supporting implementation of the current 
Policy  by  linking  up  potential  commercial  investors  with  agriculture  
extension and advisory service providers.
xxi. Academia and Research Institutions
The academia and research institutions are responsible for:
a. Conducting studies to assess impact of various agriculture extension 
approaches,  strategies,  and  interventions  used  in  the  course  of  
implementing the current Policy;

22 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
b.  Developing  models,  designing  and  running  some  professional  
courses in support of Policy implementation;
c. Generating and refining technology; and
d. Establishment of agricultural incubation centers.
xxii. National Assembly
The National Assembly is responsible for enacting legislation to support 
the  regulatory  framework  for  agriculture  extension  and  advisory  
services  standards  and  their  enforcement  by  responsible  institutions  
in the country.
xxiii. Local Authorities
The Local Authorities are responsible for:
a. Implementing and monitoring of the Policy within the 
decentralisation framework at council level, that is, staff 
recruitment, promotion, equipment and descent housing; and  
b. Developing and enforcing bye-laws to support implementation of 
the Policy at local council level.
xxiv. Decentralised Agriculture Extension Services System Structures
The  Decentralised  Agriculture  Extension  Services  Systems  (DAESS)  
structures  is  responsible  for  Policy  implementation,  collaboration,  
coordination and feedback on service provision.
xxv. Farmer Organisations
Farmer Organisations are responsible for:
a.  Ensuring  that  their  members  are  aware  of  developments  in  the  
sector,   including   information   on   agriculture   technologies   and   
service providers; and
b.  Ensuring  that  their  members  have  access  to  quality  agriculture  
extension and advisory services.
xxvi. Civil Society Organisations
The Civil Society is responsible for:
a. Implementing and monitoring of the Policy; and                 
b. Ensuring that non-state actors share information regarding services 
and budgets for coordination purposes.
xxvii. Development Partners
Development  Partners  are  responsible  for  technical  and  financial  
support  for implementation of the Policy.
xxviii.  Private Sector
The   private   sector   is   responsible   for   mobilising   resources   for   
implementation and monitoring of agricultural extension and advisory 
services  programmes  through  Malawi  Confederation  of  Chambers  of  
Commerce and Industry (MCCCI). 

Ministry of Agriculture | 23
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
4.2  Implementation Plan  
Annex 1 presents an outline of the implementation plan for the Policy which 
specifies  specific  goals,  objectives,  strategies,  the  responsible  entities  and  
the timelines for implementation.
4.3 Monitoring and Evaluation Plan  
Annex  2  presents  an  outline  of  the  monitoring  and  evaluation  plan  for  
the  Policy  which  specifies  targets  for  a  set  of  indicators  through  which  
performance in achieving specific outputs related to the goals and objectives 
of the Policy will be assessed. The Policy will be reviewed where necessary, 
with a comprehensive review being done in the fifth year of implementation.

ANNEXES 

Ministry of Agriculture | 25
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Annex 1: National Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services Policy 
Implementation Plan
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Priority Area 1: Agriculture Extension Capacity DevelopmentPolicy statement 1: The Policy will ensure that agriculture extension institutions and infrastructure are developed to enhance their efficiency and effectiveness
To build institutional and human capacity for effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services
Promote agriculture extension institutions to support implementation of services
MoA
, District Councils, Development Partners, 
NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, ASPs, NSP
2025-2030
Improve coordination and management of agriculture extension and advisory services
MoA
, District Councils, Development Partners, 
NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Private Organisations, and ASPs, NSP
2025-2030
Promote modern infrastructure development
MoA
, District Councils, Development Partners, 
NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2029
Promote agriculture innovation system
MoA
, District Councils, Development Partners, 
NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAESS platforms, FOs, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2030
Promote Private Extension Services
MoA
, Development Partners, NGOs, Academia, 
Private Organizations
2025-2030
Improve regulatory framework for effective delivery of agriculture extension and advisory services
MoA
, District Councils, Ministry of Justice, Malawi 
National Assembly 
2026-2028
Improve mobility of agriculture extension and advisory services officers at all levels
MoA
, District Councils, Development Partners, 
NGOs, FOs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations
2025-2028
Strengthen various mechanisms for financing extension programmes 
MoA, 
District Councils, Development Partners, 
NGOs, FOs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations
2025-2029

26 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy statement 2. The Policy advocates staff development programmes to continuously address needs of clients in the dynamic agriculture extension and advisory services sub-sector
To build institutional and human capacity for effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services
Enhance staffing of agriculture extension and advisory services providers
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FOs, Religious 
Organisations, Private Organisations
2025-2030
Strengthen professional, technical and managerial capacity of agriculture extension and advisory services providers
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Private Organisations 
2025-2030
Policy Priority Area 2: Knowledge ManagementPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that knowledge management, is improved to ease presentation, understanding and delivery of extension and advisory services 
To promote implementation of innovative agriculture extension methods and approaches
Promote research extension farmer linkages at different levels of implementation 
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia, National Commission for Science and Technology  
2025-2030
Improve knowledge of technologies among agriculture extension and advisory services providers
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations and Academia
2025-2030
Promote farmer access to well-packaged technologies through different methods and techniques
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2030

Ministry of Agriculture | 27
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Statement 2: The Policy will ensure that dissemination of different technologies using ICT and interpersonal media is enhanced for increased adoption
To increase farmers’ access to appropriate and up to date agriculture extension and advisory services messages and information 
 
Promote ICT-based extension and advisory services for accelerated access to technologies
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2028
Facilitate development and dissemination of diverse and farmer-tailored agriculture information and messages
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2030
Enhance participatory development of agriculture messages
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2030
Enhance delivery of agriculture messages through interpersonal methods
MoA
, MoLG, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations 
2025-2030
Promote use of locally adapted communication strategies 
MoA, 
MoLG, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations
2025-2030
Policy statement 3: The Policy will ensure that effective data capturing, processing and storage of available information on different technologies at all levels is promoted
To increase farmers’ access to appropriate and up to date agriculture extension and advisory services messages
Strengthen capturing, processing and documentation of agriculture data and information
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2027
To improve coordination and collaboration in provision of agriculture extension and advisory services among stakeholders
Strengthen linkages and networking among extension stakeholders in knowledge management
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2030
Improve access to timely agriculture information and technologies
MoA
, District Councils, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, 
DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations, Academia
2025-2030

28 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Priority Area 3: Farmer Organization and EmpowermentPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that capacity development programmes for farmers and their organizations are implemented
To build institutional and human capacity for effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services
Facilitate formation and development of farmer groups into business-oriented farmer organisations
MoA
, MoTI, MoL, MoY, District 
Councils, Development Partners, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Enhance capacity of farmers to organise, mobilise, engage service providers for agriculture extension and auxiliary services
MoA
, MoTI, MoL, MoY, District 
Councils, Development Partners, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Strengthen technical and managerial capacity of farmer organisations 
MoA
, MoTI, District Councils, 
Development Partners, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisations
2025-2030
Promote participation of youth, women and other vulnerable gender categories in farmer organisations management
MoA
, MoY, MoGCDSW, MoI, 
District Councils, Development Partners, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, DAECCs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations, Private Organisation
2025-2030

Ministry of Agriculture | 29
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Priority Area 4: Agriculture Commercialisation and Market Linkages Policy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that agriculture commercialisation is promoted 
To increase agro-processing, value addition and access to reliable agriculture markets
Build staff capacity in agriculture ex
-
tension approaches and methods that promote market-led mass production, agro-processing, storage and ware
-
housing of agriculture commodities
MoA,
   MoTI, MoLGCU, MoGCDSW, MoL, MoY, MoJ, 
MoF, MoE, NGOs, FOs, Religious Organisations, MITC, Private Sector
2025-2030
Enhance private sector investments in agribusiness including mega farm 
Private Sector
, MITC, MoA, 
 MoTI, MoLGCU, 
MoGCDSW, MoL, MoY, MoJ, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Develop innovative financial products for farmers of all gender categories
Private Sector
, MITC, MoA, MoTI, MoLGCU, 
MoGCDSW, MoJ, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Promote agri-preneurship among farmers of all gender categories including the youth and other value chain actors
MoA
, Private Sector, MITC, MoI, MoLGCU, 
MoGCDSW, MoJ, MoL, MoY, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, FOs, Religious Organisations, Academia
2025-2030
Build institutional and farmer capacity in agro-processing and value addition
MoTI
, MoA, Private Sector, MITC, MoLGCU, 
MoGCSW, MoJ, MoF, MoE, EAD, MBS, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, FOs, DSPs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Promote access to financial services by farmers of all gender categories
Private Sector
, MITC, MoA, MoI, MoLGCU, 
MoGCDSW, MoL, MoY, MoJ, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030

30 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Statement 2: The Policy will ensure that markets and market linkages are in place
To increase agro-processing, value addition and access to reliable agriculture markets
Promote development of agriculture market infrastructure
MoTI
, Private Sector, MITC, MoA, MoLGCU, 
MoGCDSW, MoY, MoL, MoJ, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FOs, FUM, NASFAM, MAFECO, FBOs, CBOs, ADMARC, Religious Organisations
2025-2028
Strengthen contract farming arrangements between producers and buyers
MoA
, Private Sector, MITC,MoTI, MoLGCU, 
MoGCSW, MoY, MoJ, MoL, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FOs, FUM, NASFAM,  MAFECO
2025-2030
Build capacity of staff and farmer organisation in marketing
MoTI
, Private Sector, MITC, MoA, District Councils, 
MoGCDSW, MoY, MoJ, MoF, MoE, NGOs, FOs, FUM, NASFAM, MAFECO
2025-2030
Promote development of regulated markets and market linkages
MoTI
, Private Sector, MITC, MoA, District Councils, 
MoGCDSW, MoY, MoJ, MoF, MoE, NGOs, CBOs, DSPs, FOs, FUM, NASFAM, MAFECO
2025-2028
Policy Priority Area 5: Food and NutritionPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that interventions on nutrition education and surveillance are promoted
To increase availability and consumption of diversified and nutritious foods among farming households
Promote diversified production of nutritious and safe foods
MoA
, MoH, District Councils, Research Institutions, 
NGOs, FBOs, CBOs, FOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Promote food safety technologies that reduce post-harvest losses in food production, preservation, processing and storage
MoA
, MoH, District Councils, Research Institutions, 
NGOs, FOs, CBOs, MBS
2025-2028
Scale-up nutrition education and behaviour change
MoA
, MoH, District Councils, Research Institutions, 
NGOs and FOs, FBOs, CBOs 
2025-2030
Enhance improved dietary practices
MoA
, MoH, District Councils, Research Institutions, 
NGOs, FOs, FBOs, CBOs
2025-2030
Strengthen food surveillance system for effective implementation of the food and nutrition program
MoA, 
MoH, District Councils, Research Institutions, 
NGOs, FOs, CBOs
2025-2030

Ministry of Agriculture | 31
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Priority Area 6: Youth and Agriculture Development
Policy Statement: The Policy will ensure promotion of youth participation in agriculture extension services and development programmes
To increase access, ownership and control over productive agriculture assets and benefits by youths 
Promote effective youth involvement and decision-making in agriculture programmes
MoA
, MoY, MoGCSW, Ministry of Industry, District 
Councils, Development Partners, CSOs, NGOs, Private Sector, Academia
2025-2030
Support training for out-of-school youth in agricultural production, agro-processing and marketing
MoA
, MoY, MoL, MoGCDSW, Ministry of Industry, 
District Councils, Development Partners, CSOs, NGOs, Private Sector, Academia
2025-2030
Promote modernisation of agriculture through introduction of modern technologies to attract the youth 
MoA
, MoY, MoGCSW, MoL, MoI, District Councils, 
Development Partners, CSOs, NGOs, Private Sector, Research Institutions
2025-2030
Promote business incubation centres for youth in agriculture 
MoY
, MoA, MoL, MoGCDSW, MoI, District Councils, 
Development Partners, NGOs, FOs, Private Sector, SMEDI, Academia
2025-2028
Support agriculture technical vocational education training for youth 
TEVETA
, MoA, MoL, MoY, MoGCDSW, MoI, District 
Councils, Development Partners, NGOs, Private Sector, Academia
2025-2030

32 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Responsibility
Timeframe
Policy Priority Area 7: Cross Cutting Issues  Policy statement 1: The Policy will ensure that gender, HIV and AIDS are integrated in the agriculture extension and advisory services
To increase access, ownership and control over productive agriculture assets and benefits by women and vulnerable groups
Promote access, ownership and control over productive resources for women and other vulnerable groups
MoA
, MoY, MoGCSW, Ministry of Trade and 
Industry, MoL, District Councils, NGOs, CBOs, FBOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Promote agriculture education and technical training for women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups 
MoA
, MoL, MoY, MoGCDSW, MoI, Ministry of 
Lands, District Councils, Development Partners, CSOs, NGOs, TEVETA, Academia
2025-2030
Support agribusiness entrepreneurship among women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups
MoA
, MoGCDSW, MoID, MoT, MoL, Ministry of 
Lands, District Councils, Development Partners, CSOs, NGOs, Private Sector, Academia
2025-2030
Facilitate access to finance for women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture
MoA
, MoY, MoGCDSW, MoID, District Councils, 
Development Partners, CSOs, NGOs
2025-2030
Promote participation of women and vulnerable groups in agriculture and environmental management programmes
MoA
, MoYS, MoGCDSW, MoL, Ministry of Lands, 
District Councils, Development Partners, EAD, CBOs, NGOs
2025-2030
Promote agriculture programmes and projects that are responsive to gender and HIV at the workplace and community levels 
MoA
, MoY, MoGCDSW, Ministry of Trade and 
Industry, Ministry of Lands, District Councils, Development Partners, NGOs, FOs, FBOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Prioritise capacity development for gender and HIV responsive extension for all staff and farmers in the agricul
-
ture sector
MoA
, MoY, MoGCDSW, Ministry of Industry, 
Ministry of Lands, District Councils, EAD, Development Partners, NGOs, FOs, FBOs, Religious Organisations
2025-2030
Policy statement 2: The Policy will ensure that climate change and environment are integrated in the agriculture extension and advisory services 
To increase farmers’ access to appropriate and up-to-date agriculture extension and advisory services messages and information  
Promote implementation of cli
-
mate-smart agriculture among farmers of all gender categories
MoA
, MoY, MoGCDSW, Ministry of Industry, 
Ministry of Lands, District Councils, EAD, Development Partners, NGOs, FOs, FBOs, Religious Organisations, Department of Climate Change and Meteorological Services
2025-2030

Ministry of Agriculture | 33
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Annex 2: Monitoring and Evaluation Plan 
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 1: Agriculture Extension Capacity DevelopmentPolicy Outcome: Increased farmer adoption of sustainable agriculture technologiesPolicy statement 1: The Policy will ensure that agriculture extension institutions and infrastructure are developed to enhance their efficiency and effectivenessTo build institutional and human capacity for effective provi
-
sion of agriculture extension and advi
-
sory services
Promote agriculture extension in
-
stitutions to support plan
-
ning and im
-
plementation of services
National Agriculture Stakeholder Panel (NASP)  functional  
Number of functional National Agriculture Stakeholder Panel (NASP)
1
1
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
The district councils are fully supporting the DAESS structuresDAESS structures are able to mobilise their own resources for implementation of their action plans
District Agriculture Stakeholder Panels (DASP) functional  
Number of functional District Agriculture Stakeholder Panels (DASP)
28
14
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
District Agriculture Coordination Committees (DAECC) functional  
Number of functional District Agriculture Extension Coordination Committees (DAECC)
28
20
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Agriculture Service Committees functional  
Number of functional Agriculture Service Committees
28
28
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Agriculture Area Stakeholder Panels  functional   
Number of functional Agriculture Area Stakeholder Panels (AASP)
433
431
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Village Agriculture Stakeholder Panels  functional   
Number of functional Village Agriculture Stakeholder Panels (VASP)
6,004
3,001
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services

34 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Village Agriculture Committees functional  
Number of functional Village Agriculture Committees (VAC)
35,411
17,706
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Improve coordination and management of agriculture extension and advisory services
Agriculture extension stakeholders with Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Agriculture registered
Percentage of registered agriculture extension stakeholders with Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Agriculture 
100%
40%
Stakeholder meeting reports and supervisions reports
Availability of standards to regulate service provision 
Quarterly stakeholders’ coordination and joint planning meetings conducted
Number of quarterly stakeholders’ coordination and joint planning meetings conducted at each level
20
4
Stakeholder meeting reports and supervisions reports
Availability of resources
Promote modern infrastructure development 
Agricultural Residential Training Centres (RTCs) rehabilitated
Number of Residential Training Centres rehabilitated
8
2
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Agricultural Residential Training Centres (RTCs) upgraded
Number of Residential Training Centres upgraded
4
0
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Agricultural Development Divisions’ offices upgraded
Number of Agricultural Development Divisions’ offices upgraded
8
3
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services

Ministry of Agriculture | 35
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Village Agriculture Committees functional  
Number of functional Village Agriculture Committees (VAC)
35,411
17,706
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Improve coordination and management of agriculture extension and advisory services
Agriculture extension stakeholders with Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Agriculture registered
Percentage of registered agriculture extension stakeholders with Memorandum of Understanding with the Ministry of Agriculture 
100%
40%
Stakeholder meeting reports and supervisions reports
Availability of standards to regulate service provision 
Quarterly stakeholders’ coordination and joint planning meetings conducted
Number of quarterly stakeholders’ coordination and joint planning meetings conducted at each level
20
4
Stakeholder meeting reports and supervisions reports
Availability of resources
Promote modern infrastructure development 
Agricultural Residential Training Centres (RTCs) rehabilitated
Number of Residential Training Centres rehabilitated
8
2
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Agricultural Residential Training Centres (RTCs) upgraded
Number of Residential Training Centres upgraded
4
0
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Agricultural Development Divisions’ offices upgraded
Number of Agricultural Development Divisions’ offices upgraded
8
3
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Extension Planning Area Offices maintained with power and housing facilities
Number of Extension Planning Area offices maintained
31
4
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Relevant equipment supplied to RTCs
Number of RTCs supplied with relevant equipment
12
5
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services  
Availability of resources
Relevant equipment supplied to Agricultural Development Divisions’ offices
Number of Agricultural Development Divisions’ offices with relevant equipment
8
0
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Relevant equipment supplied to Extension Planning Area Offices
Number of functional Extension Planning Area offices supplied with relevant ICT equipment
31
0
Annual reports from Department of Agriculture Extension Services

36 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Improve regulatory framework for effective delivery of agriculture extension and advisory services
Agribusiness Strategy developed
Number of Agribusiness Strategies developed
1
0
Agribusiness Strategy
Readiness and commitment of all agriculture stakeholders to input into strategic documents
Agriculture Sector Gender, HIV and AIDS Strategy reviewed 
Number of Agriculture Sector Gender, HIV and AIDS Strategies reviewed
1
0
Agriculture Sector Gender, HIV and AIDS Strategy
Laws to regulate agriculture extension and advisory services enacted
Number of laws to regulate agriculture extension and advisory services enacted
1
1
Act of parliament for Agriculture Extension and Advisory Services
Improve mobility of agriculture extension and advisory services officers at all levels
Motorbikes for frontline staff procured
Number of motorbikes for frontline staff procured
1,500
800
Annual joint sector review reports
Availability of funds
Vehicles for field operations procured
Number of vehicles for field operations procured
41
20
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services  
Mobile vans for field operations procured
Number of mobile vans for field operations procured
5
6
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services  
Outdoor concert stage track/live broadcast promotion vehicle
Number of outdoor concert track/live promotion vehicle
1
0
Procurement reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services 
Availability of funds
Promote Agriculture Innovation Systems
Agriculture innovation platforms functional
Number of functional innovation platforms
402
25
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Willingness of other players to participate in other platforms
Agriculture innovations developed
Number of innovations developed
20
10

Ministry of Agriculture | 37
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Promote private extension services following government set standards
Standards for provision of private extension service developed and provided 
Number of standards developed and promoted
1
0
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Availability of Agriculture Extension and advisory services Act
Institutionalise provision of private extension service  
Number of players providing private extension services
30
10
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Demand by mega farmers for private extensionWillingness of other players to provide private extension to farmers
Improve financing for extension services
Strengthen various mechanisms for financing extension programmes
Agriculture extension fund order operational
Agriculture extension fund order in operation
1
1
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Government commitment to continue with the Fund Order arrangement
Grants for extension programmes provided
Number of grants for extension programmes provided
10
2
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Willingness of donor partners to fund extension
Farmer-led financing mechanisms established
Number of farmer-led financing mechanisms established
10
2
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Farmer willingness to pay subscriptions
Agriculture extension PPPs established
Number of agriculture extension PPPs established
10
2
Annual reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Willingness of partners to fund extension

38 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy statement 2: The Policy will ensure that staff development programmes continuously address needs of clients in the dynamic agriculture extension and advisory services sub-sector are advocatedTo build institutional and human capacity for effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services
Enhance staffing of agricultural extension and advisory services providers
Agricultural extension and advisory services personnel recruited
Percentage of vacancies of agricultural extension personnel filled  
100%
70%
Recruitment reports 
Availability of funds
Department of Agriculture Extension Services adequately staffed
Vacancy rate 
100%
70%
Staff return report from Department of Agriculture Extension Services  
Availability of funds 
Strengthen professional, technical and managerial capacity of agriculture extension and advisory services providers
Agriculture extension staff holding managerial positions trained
Percentage of agriculture extension staff holding managerial positions trained
80%
10%
Training reports from the Department of Agriculture Extension Services
Availability of resources for trainings
Subject matter specialists trained
Percentage of subject matter specialists trained
80%
40%
Frontline extension workers trained  
Percentage of frontline extension workers trained  
80%
50%

Ministry of Agriculture | 39
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 2: Knowledge ManagementPolicy Outcome: Increased farmer adoption of sustainable agriculture technologiesPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that knowledge management, is improved to ease presentation, understanding and delivery of agriculture extension and advisory services To promote implementation of innovative agriculture extension methods and approaches 
Promote re
-
search exten
-
sion farmer linkages at different levels of implementa
-
tion
Farmer field days conducted
Number of farmer field days conducted
14,090
2,114
Department of Agriculture Research Services reports
Good collaboration between research, extension and farmers
Research dissemination meetings conducted
Number of research dissemination meetings conducted
50
5
Joint on-farm trials conducted
Number of joint on- farm trials conducted
50
5
Improve knowledge of technologies among agriculture extension and advisory services providers
Agriculture extension workers trained in up-coming modern farming technologies, methods and approaches 
Percentage of extension workers trained in up-coming modern farming technologies, methods and approaches 
70%
20%
Training reports
Availability of resources for trainings
Agriculture extension tours undertaken
Number of agriculture extension tours undertaken
140
40
Back to office reports
Availability of resources
Promote farmer access to well-packaged technologies through different methods and techniques
Farmers reached with agriculture extension messages
Percentage of farmers reached with agriculture extension messages
80%
57%
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Readiness of farmers to receive and use the  messages                     Availability of well-packaged technologies

40 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Statement 2: The Policy will ensure that dissemination of different technologies using ICT and interpersonal media is enhanced for increased adoptionTo increase farmers’ access to appropriate and up to date agriculture extension and advisory services messages
Promote ICT-based extension and advisory services for accelerated access to technologies
ICT based agriculture extension and advisory services established
Number of ICT based agriculture extension and advisory services established
14
6
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Financial and human resourcesPolitical will
Facilitate development and dissemination of diverse and farmer-tailored agriculture messages
Farmer-tailored agriculture information and messages developed and disseminated
Number of farmer-tailored agriculture and message developed and disseminated
120
40
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Financial supportPolitical will
Enhance participatory development of agriculture messages
Participatory meetings on message development conducted
Number of participatory meetings on message development conducted
100
8
Department of Agriculture Extension Services Annual reports  
Collaboration among stakeholders and availability of resources
Agriculture extension messages co-developed
Number of agriculture extension messages co-developed
60
8
Department of Agriculture Extension Services Annual reports  

Ministry of Agriculture | 41
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Enhance the delivery of agricultural messages through interpersonal methods
Community meetings conducted  
Number of community meetings conducted
33,825
6,512
Minutes of the meetings, Ministry of Agriculture annual reports 
Financial supportPolitical will
Agricultural call centres established  
Number of agricultural call centres established
2
1
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Interactive radio programmes produced and aired   
Number of interactive radio programmes produced and aired  
25
12
Radio programmes recorded
Interactive radio episodes produced and aired
Number of interactive radio episodes produced and aired
300
72
Radio episodes produced and aired
Agricultural video programmes produced and aired 
Number agricultural video programmes produced and aired
75
15
Videos produced
Multimedia campaigns conducted  
Number of multimedia campaigns conducted
20
4
Department of Agriculture Extension Services annual reports

42 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Promote the use of locally adapted communication strategies
Community radio programmes produced and aired
Number of community radio programmes produced and aired
56
12
Reports, number of locally adapted communication research
Financial supportPolitical will
Radio listening clubs established and maintained
Number of radio listening clubs established and maintained
615
518
Department of Agriculture Extension Services annual reports
Agriculture Resource Centres (ARCs) established and maintained
Number of Agriculture Resource Centres (ARCs) established and maintained
206
52
Department of Agriculture Extension Services annual reportsDepartment of Agriculture Extension Services annual reports
Drama clubs engaged on agriculture extension services and advisory services
Number of drama clubs engaged on agriculture extension and advisory services 
234
12

Ministry of Agriculture | 43
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy statement 3:  The Policy will ensure that effective data capturing, processing and storage of available information on different technologies at all levels is promoted  To increase farmers’ access to appropriate and up to date agriculture extension and advisory services messages
Strengthen capturing, processing and documentation of agriculture data and information
Agriculture extension database linked to NAMIS
Number of agriculture extension databases linked to NAMIS
1
0
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Availability of financial and human resources
To improve coordination and collaboration in provision of agriculture extension and advisory services among stakeholders
Strengthen linkages and networking among extension stakeholders in knowledge management
Agriculture knowledge sharing forums conducted
Number of agriculture knowledge sharing forums conducted
20
5
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Availability of financial resourcesWillingness of stakeholders
Stakeholders’ joint review meetings conducted
Number of stakeholders’ joint review meetings conducted
10
5
Joint review meeting reports
Joint stakeholder supervision visits conducted
Number of joint stakeholder supervision visits conducted
10
4
Joint supervision visits reports 
Improve access to timely agriculture information and technologies
Agriculture extension information and technologies timely accessed by farmers
Percentage of farmers reached with timely agriculture extension information and technologies
80%
57%
Annual survey reports on access to extension services
Availability of resources

44 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 3: Farmer Organisation and EmpowermentPolicy Outcome: Increased agro-based incomes of farmers and other value chain actors of all gender categoriesPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that capacity development programmes for farmers and their organisations are implementedTo build institutional and human capacity for effective provision of agriculture extension and advisory services
Facilitate formation and development of farmer groups into business-oriented farmer organisations
Farmer groups formed
Number of farmer groups formed
4,000
2,000
Reports, database of farmer organisation
Availability of resources
Farmer organisations trained in cooperative and association management
Number of farmer organisations trained in cooperative and association management
1,200
1,000
Reports, database of farmer organisation
Availability of resourcesWillingness of farmers to reorganize into business-oriented farmer organisations All members have aligned interests and objectives
Farmer groups legally registered
Number of farmer groups legally registered
1,200
1,000
Reports, database of farmer organisation
Farmer organisation database developed
Number of farmer organisation database developed
1
1
Reports, database of farmer organisation
Farmer groups trained in group development and organisational management
Number of farmer groups trained in group development and organisational management
4,000
2,000
Reports, database of Farmer organisation
Improved literacy levels for members of farmer organisations
Number of farmer organisation strengthened in record keeping, procurement and financial literacy
2,000
1,500
Reports, compendium of best practices
Availability of funds

Ministry of Agriculture | 45
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Farmer learning routes conducted
Number of farmer learning routes conducted
1,250
700
Reports, compendium of best practices
Willingness of farmers
Enhance capacity of farmer organisations in resource mobilisation and engagement of service providers for agriculture extension and advisory services
Farmer groups trained in agribusiness services from extension workers
Number of farmer groups trained in agribusiness services from extension workers
2,000
500
Reports, database of farmer organisation
Availability of functional District Agriculture Extension Services System structures
Farmer organisations linked to various agriculture and other service providers
Number of farmer organisations linked to various agriculture and other service providers
620
350
Reports, database of farmer organisation
Farmer organisations involved in contract management and negotiations
Number of farmer organisations on contract management and negotiations
1,200
1,000
Reports, database of farmer organisations
Strengthen technical and managerial capacity of farmer organisations
Farmer groups trained in business management, book keeping and accounting, procurement procedures
Number of farmer groups trained in business management, book keeping and accounting, procurement procedures
4,000
2,000
Reports, database of farmer organisations
Availability of resourcesWillingness of farmers to improve their capacity in business managementImproved literacy levels for members of farmers organisation

46 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Groups under mentorship and coaching programmes 
Number of groups under mentorship and coaching programmes
400
100
Reports from groups under mentorship 
Willingness of groups to avail themselves for coaching and mentorship programs
Promote public private partnership in farmer organisation capacity development
Public private partnerships in farmer organisations developed
Number of public private partnership arrangements with farmer organisation in capacity buildings, matching grants and loans
5
1
Reports from Ministry of Agriculture, Department of Agriculture Extension Services and Ministry of Trade and Industry
Availability of resources and policy environment that promotes PPP
Promote participation of youth, women and other vulnerable gender categories in farmer organisation management
Youth, women and other vulnerable gender categories participating in farmer organisation management
Percentage of youth, women and other vulnerable gender categories participating in farmer organisation management
40%
15%
Reports, database of farmer organisations, surveys on youth and women participation in leadership
Availability of resourcesImproved literacy of youths and women in leadership position
Farmer groups trained in gender and women empowerment
Number of farmer groups trained in gender and women empowerment
4,000
2,000
Farmer training reports
Availability of resourcesWillingness of youths and vulnerable gender categories to join farmer groups

Ministry of Agriculture | 47
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 4: Agriculture Commercialisation and Market LinkagesPolicy Outcome: Increased agro-based incomes of farmers and other value chain actors of all gender categoriesPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that agriculture commercialisation is promotedTo increase agro-processing, value addition and access to reliable agriculture markets
Build staff capacity in agriculture extension approaches and methods that promote market-led mass production, agro-processing, storage and warehousing of agriculture commodities
Staff trained in agriculture extension approaches and methods that promote market-led mass production, agro-processing, storage and warehousing of agriculture commodities
Number of staff trained in agriculture extension approaches and methods that promote market-led mass production, agro-processing, storage and warehousing of agriculture commodities
750
150
Training reports from Ministry of Agriculture and Ministry of Trade and Industry
Availability of resources
Enhance private sector, including mega farm, investments in agribusiness
Private sector led agricultural investments 
Number of private investors in agriculture
60
12
Reports from Ministry of Trade and Industry
Conducive macroeconomic environment for investors
FOs engaged in agro-processing and value addition
Number of FOs engaged in agro-processing and value addition
100
30
Reports from Ministry of Trade and Industry
Willingness of farmers to join FosGood governance of FOs
Private investors engaged in agro-processing and value addition
Number of private investors engaged in agro-processing and value addition
40
12
Reports from Ministry of Trade and Industry
Availability of raw materialsReliable power supply

48 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Develop innovative financial products for farmers of all gender categories
Financial services provided to FOs by commercial banks
Number of commercial banks providing financial services to FOs
15
5
Reports from Commercial Banks and Bankers Association of MalawiDepartment of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Affordable interest rates offered by Commercial Banks
Financial products targeting FOs developed
Number of financial products targeting FOs developed
6
2
Insurance premiums targeting FOs developed
Number of FOs covered with insurance premiums
100
10
Financial products
Promote agri-preneurship among farmers of all gender categories including the youth and other value chain actors
Value chain actors including the youth engaged in agri-preneurship 
Number of value chain actors including the youth engaged in agri-prenuership 
320
60
Database of agri-preneurs, training reports
Availability of affordable resources
Build institutional and farmer capacity in agro-processing and value addition
FOs trained in agro-processing and value addition
Number of FOs trained in agro-processing and value addition
100
30
Training Reports, database of FOs
Affordability of equipment for agro-processing and value addition
Promote access to financial services by farmers of all gender categories
Financial services accessed by FOs
Number of FOs linked/accessing financial services
220
100
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reportsReports from Commercial Banks and Bankers Association of Malawi
Availability of various sources of financeAffordable interest rates offered by Commercial Banks

Ministry of Agriculture | 49
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Statement 2: The Policy will ensure that markets and market linkages are in placeTo increase Agro-processing, value addition and access to reliable agriculture markets
Promote development of agriculture market infrastructure
Structured markets established
Number of structured markets established
8
4
Structured markets reports
Prioritised value chains are well supported by all chain players
Strengthen contract farming arrangements between producers and buyers
Contract Farming Law enacted
Number of Contract Farming Laws
1
0
Contract Farming Law reports, signed contracts
Availability of resources
Contracts signed between producers and buyers 
Number of contracts signed between producers and buyers
1,000
400
Build capacity of staff and farmer organisations in marketing
Staff trained in marketing
Number of staff trained in marketing
250
50
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Availability of Contract Farming Law
FOs trained in marketing 
Number of FOs trained in marketing
920
300
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Availability of Contract Farming Law
FOs linked to markets 
Number of FOs linked to markets
920
300
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports
Promote development of regulated markets and market linkages
Regulated markets developed
Number of regulated markets developed
10
2
Department of Agriculture Extension Services reports, regulated markets
Availability of Laws and Regulations for markets

50 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 5: Food and NutritionPolicy Outcome: Improved dietary diversification among farmers of all gender categoriesPolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that interventions on nutrition education and surveillance are promotedTo increase availability and consumption of diversified and nutritious foods among farming households
Promote diversified production of nutritious and safe foods
Production of nutritious and safe foods diversified by households
Percentage of households practicing diversified production of nutritious and safe foods
60%
30%
APES reports
Farmers will be able to access diverse types of seed for nutritious crops
Promote food safety technologies that reduce post-harvest losses in food production, preservation, processing and storage
Production technologies promoting food safety disseminated
Number of food production technologies disseminated
5
3
Ministry of Agriculture annual reports
Availability of resources for training farmersWillingness to use technologies
Food storage technologies disseminated
Number of food storage technologies disseminated
8
5
Food processing technologies disseminated
Number of food processing technologies disseminated
8
4
Department of Agriculture Extension Services annual reports
Food preservation technologies disseminated
Number of food preservation technologies disseminated
6
2
Department of Agriculture Extension Services annual reports

Ministry of Agriculture | 51
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Scale-up nutrition education and behaviour change
Staff trained in nutrition education and behaviour change
Number of staff trained in nutrition education and behaviour change
700
200
Training reports
Availability of resources for training such as funds, training materialsWillingness of farmers to attend the training
Farmers trained in nutrition education
Number of farmers trained in nutrition education
70,000
21,000
Training reports
Nutrition education and behaviour change campaigns conducted
Number of nutrition education and behaviour change campaigns conducted
40
20
Departmental annual reports
Availability of resources
Enhance improved dietary practices
Households reached with dietary diversification messages
Percentage of households reached with dietary diversification messages
80%
40%
Availability of resources for disseminating messages
Strengthen food and nu
-
trition surveil
-
lance system for effective implemen
-
tation of the food and nutri
-
tion program
Staff trained in food and nutrition surveillance
Number of staff trained in food and nutrition surveillance
700
100
Nutrition surveillance reports
Availability of competent staff
Food and nutrition sentinel sites established
Number of food and nutrition sentinel sites established  
280
70
Food and nutrition surveillance conducted
Number of households participating in food and nutrition surveillance
2,800
280

52 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 6: Youth and Agriculture DevelopmentPolicy Outcome: Improved socio-economic status of women, youth and other vulnerable groups in agriculturePolicy Statement: The Policy will ensure promotion of youth participation in agriculture extension services and development programmesTo increase access, ownership and control over productive agriculture assets and benefits by youths 
Promote effective youth involvement and decision-making in agriculture programmes
Youth involved in decision making in agriculture programmes
Percentage of youth involved in decision making in agriculture programmes 
50%
25%
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of funds Willingness of the youth
Support training for out-of-school youth in agricultural production, agro-processing and marketing
Out-of-school youth trained in agriculture production, agro-processing and marketing
Percentage of out-of-school youth trained in agriculture production, agro-processing and marketing 
50%
15%
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of fundWillingness of the youth
Promote modernization of agriculture through the introduction of modern farming technologies to attract the youth
Youth friendly modern agriculture technologies disseminated
Number of youth friendly modern agriculture technologies disseminated 
10
 4
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of funds
Youth aware of modern agriculture technologies
Percentage of youths aware on modern agriculture technologies
60%
30%
Ministry of Agriculture reports
Availability of resources

Ministry of Agriculture | 53
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Modern farming technologies adopted
Percentage of youth adopting the modern farming technologies
40%
10%
Ministry of Agriculture reports
Willingness of the youth
Agricultural finance accessed by the youth
Percentage of the youth accessing agricultural finance
40%
10%
Ministry of Agriculture reports
Availability of financial institutionsAvailability of funds
Promote business incubation centres for the youth in agriculture
Agriculture business incubation centres for the youth established
Number of agriculture business incubation centres for the youth established
30
4
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of funds Stakeholder commitment
Support agriculture technical vocational education training for youth
Youth trained in agricultural vocational education
Percentage of youth trained in agricultural vocational education 
25%
5 %
Ministry of Agriculture, TEVET reports 
Availability of funds Stakeholder commitment

54 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Policy Priority Area 7: Cross Cutting Issues Policy Outcome: Improved economic status of women, youth and other vulnerable groups in agriculturePolicy Statement 1: The Policy will ensure that gender, HIV and AIDS are integrated in the agriculture extension and advisory servicesTo increase access, ownership and control over productive agriculture assets and benefits by women and vulnerable groups
Promote access, ownership and control over productive resources for women and other vulnerable groups
Agricultural productive resources accessed by women and other vulnerable groups 
Proportion of women and other vulnerable groups accessing agricultural productive resources
80%
50%
Ministry of Agriculture reports
Availability of funds
Ownership and control over productive resources and benefits by women and other vulnerable groups increased
Proportion of women and other vulnerable groups with increased   ownership and control over productive resources and benefits
60%
25%
Ministry of Agriculture reports
Promote agriculture education and technical training for women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups
Good Agriculture Practices (GAPs) implemented by women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups
Proportion of vulnerable groups implementing GAPs
70%
35%
Ministry of Agriculture reports
Different extension approaches implemented by vulnerable groups
Proportion of vulnerable groups implementing different extension approaches and methods
70%
35%

Ministry of Agriculture | 55
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Support agri
-
business en
-
trepreneurship among women, persons with disabilities and other vulnera
-
ble groups
Agricultural enterprises owned by women, persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups
Percentage of women owning agricultural enterprises
50%
25%
Percentage of persons with disabilities and other vulnerable groups owning agricultural enterprises
30%
15%
Facilitate access to finance for women and other vulnerable groups in agriculture
Agricultural finance accessed by women and other vulnerable groups
Proportion of women in agriculture with access to finance
60%
27%
Proportion of persons with disability in agriculture with access to finance
40%
5%
Promote participation of women and vulnerable groups in agriculture programmes
 
Women and other vulnerable groups participating in agriculture programmes
Proportion of women in agriculture programmes 
90%
60%
Proportion of persons with disability participating in agriculture programmes
50%
10%

56 | Ministry of Agriculture
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE EXTENSION AND ADVISORY SERVICES POLICY | 2025
Objective
Strategy
Output
Performance indicator
Target
Baseline
Means of Verification
Assumptions/Risks
Promote agriculture programmes and projects that are responsive to gender and HIV at the workplace and community levels 
Agricultural programmes and projects responsive to gender and HIV and AIDS implemented at workplace and community levels
Percentage of agriculture programmes and projects responsive to gender and HIV at workplace and community levels
100%
70%
Prioritise capacity development for gender, and HIV responsive extension for all staff and farmers in the agriculture sector
Staff trained in implementation of gender and HIV responsive agriculture extension
Proportion of staff trained in implementation of gender and HIV responsive agriculture extension
100%
60%
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of funds
Farmers trained in implementation of gender and HIV responsive agriculture extension
Proportion of farmers trained in implementation of gender and HIV responsive agriculture extension
70%
30%
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of funds
Policy Statement 2: The Policy will ensure that   climate change and environment are integrated in the agriculture extension and advisory servicesTo increase farmers’ access to appropriate and up-to-date agriculture extension and advisory services messages and information
Promote im
-
plementation of Climate Smart Agri
-
culture (CSA) among farmers of all gender categories
Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) interventions implemented by farmers 
Proportion of farmers implementing Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) interventions
80%
40%
Ministry of Agriculture reports 
Availability of funds



DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE EXTENSION SERVCICES 
AGRICULTURE COMMUNICATION BRANCH
P.O. BOX 30145
LILONGWE 3 
MALAWI.   
2025