

EXPERIMENTAL RESEARCH METHODOLOGY/ RESEARCH METHODS AND 
EXPERIMENTAL DESIGN/ DESIGN AND ANALYSIS OF EXPERIMENTS 
Due Date: 9
th
 October 2025 
Assignment 1 
Instructions: 
 Work in existing groups based on your program of study. Class Reps that have 
not submitted their program groups should do so 
 Write names of group members who significantly contributed to the analysis of 
the data. Privately report those that did not or rarely participated during group 
work. The name of group leader should be bolded. Include student number. 
 Show all steps involved during the calculation. Do not just write the answer 
 The assignment should be typed. 
Question 
The  topography  of  adipose  tissue  (AT)  is  associated  with  metabolic  complications 
considered  as  risk  factors  for  cardiovascular  disease.  It  is  important to  measure  the 
amount of intra-abdominal AT as part of the evaluation of the cardiovascular-disease risk 
of an individual. Computed tomography (CT), the only available technique that precisely 
and reliably measures the amount of deep abdominal AT is costly and requires irradiation 
of the subject. In addition, the technique is not available to many  physicians. Després 
and his colleagues conducted a study to develop equations to predict the amount of deep 
abdominal  AT  from  simple  anthropometric  measurements.  Their  subjects  were  men 
between the ages of 18 and 42 years who were free from metabolic disease that would 
require treatment. Among the measurements taken on each subject were deep abdominal 
AT obtained by CT and waist circumference as shown in the data. A question of interest 
is how well one can predict and estimate deep abdominal AT from a knowledge of waist 
circumference 
 

 
a) Use Microsoft excel, make a scatterplot of the data 
b) Which of the variable(s) is a) independent variable b) dependent variable 
c) Find the equation of the regression line and add this line to your plot 
d) What is r
2 
for the equation? 
e) State the null hypothesis being tested 

f) Use  ANOVA  to  test  the  hypothesis.  Do  you  reject  or  fail  to  reject  the  null 
hypothesis? Give reason. α = 0.05 
 
 