

ALGORITHMS
INTRODUCTION TO
THIRD EDITION
THOMAS H. 
CHARLES E.       
RONALD L. 
CLIFFORD  STEIN
RIVEST
LEISERSON
CORMEN

Introduction to Algorithms
Third Edition



Thomas H. Cormen
Charles E. Leiserson
Ronald L. Rivest
Clifford Stein
Introduction to Algorithms
Third Edition
The MIT Press
Cambridge, MassachusettsLondon, England

c
2009 Massachusetts Institute of Technology
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by any electronic or mechanical means
(including photocopying, recording, or information storage and retrieval) without permission in writing from the
publisher.
For information about special quantity discounts, please email special
sales@mitpress.mit.edu.
This book was set in Times Roman and Mathtime Pro 2 by the authors.
Printed and bound in the United States of America.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Introduction to algorithms / Thomas H. Cormen...[etal.].—3rded.
p.   cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-0-262-03384-8 (hardcover : alk. paper)—ISBN 978-0-262-53305-8 (pbk. : alk. paper)
1. Computer programming.    2. Computer algorithms.   I. Cormen, Thomas H.
QA76.6.I5858   2009
005.1—dc22
2009008593
1098765432

Contents
Prefacexiii
I  Foundations
Introduction3
1   The Role of Algorithms in Computing5
1.1Algorithms5
1.2Algorithms as a technology11
2   Getting Started16
2.1Insertion sort16
2.2Analyzing algorithms23
2.3Designing algorithms29
3   Growth of Functions43
3.1Asymptotic notation43
3.2Standard notations and common functions53
4   Divide-and-Conquer65
4.1The maximum-subarray problem68
4.2Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication75
4.3The substitution method for solving recurrences83
4.4The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences88
4.5The master method for solving recurrences93
?4.6Proof of the master theorem97
5   Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms114
5.1The hiring problem114
5.2Indicator random variables118
5.3Randomized algorithms122
?5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables
130

viContents
II  Sorting and Order Statistics
Introduction147
6Heapsort151
6.1Heaps151
6.2Maintaining the heap property154
6.3Building a heap156
6.4The heapsort algorithm159
6.5Priority queues162
7   Quicksort170
7.1Description of quicksort170
7.2Performance of quicksort174
7.3A randomized version of quicksort179
7.4Analysis of quicksort180
8   Sorting in Linear Time191
8.1Lower bounds for sorting191
8.2Counting sort194
8.3Radix sort197
8.4Bucket sort200
9   Medians and Order Statistics213
9.1Minimum and maximum214
9.2Selection in expected linear time215
9.3Selection in worst-case linear time220
III  Data Structures
Introduction229
10  Elementary Data Structures232
10.1   Stacks and queues232
10.2   Linked lists236
10.3   Implementing pointers and objects241
10.4   Representing rooted trees246
11  Hash Tables253
11.1   Direct-address tables254
11.2   Hash tables256
11.3   Hash functions262
11.4   Open addressing269
?11.5   Perfect hashing277

Contentsvii
12  Binary Search Trees286
12.1   What is a binary search tree?286
12.2   Querying a binary search tree289
12.3   Insertion and deletion294
?12.4   Randomly built binary search trees299
13  Red-Black Trees308
13.1   Properties of red-black trees308
13.2   Rotations312
13.3   Insertion315
13.4   Deletion323
14  Augmenting Data Structures339
14.1   Dynamic order statistics339
14.2   How to augment a data structure345
14.3   Interval trees348
IV  Advanced Design and Analysis Techniques
Introduction357
15  Dynamic Programming359
15.1   Rod cutting360
15.2   Matrix-chain multiplication370
15.3   Elements of dynamic programming378
15.4   Longest common subsequence390
15.5   Optimal binary search trees397
16  Greedy Algorithms414
16.1   An activity-selection problem415
16.2   Elements of the greedy strategy423
16.3   Huffman codes428
?16.4   Matroids and greedy methods437
?16.5   A task-scheduling problem as a matroid443
17  Amortized Analysis451
17.1   Aggregate analysis452
17.2   The accounting method456
17.3   The potential method459
17.4   Dynamic tables463

viiiContents
V  Advanced Data Structures
Introduction481
18  B-Trees484
18.1   Definition of B-trees488
18.2   Basic operations on B-trees491
18.3   Deleting a key from a B-tree499
19  Fibonacci Heaps505
19.1   Structure of Fibonacci heaps507
19.2   Mergeable-heap operations510
19.3   Decreasing a key and deleting a node518
19.4   Bounding the maximum degree523
20  van Emde Boas Trees531
20.1   Preliminary approaches532
20.2   A recursive structure536
20.3   The van Emde Boas tree545
21  Data Structures for Disjoint Sets561
21.1   Disjoint-set operations561
21.2   Linked-list representation of disjoint sets564
21.3   Disjoint-set forests568
?21.4   Analysis of union by rank with path compression573
VI  Graph Algorithms
Introduction587
22  Elementary Graph Algorithms589
22.1   Representations of graphs589
22.2   Breadth-first search594
22.3   Depth-first search603
22.4   Topological sort612
22.5   Strongly connected components615
23  Minimum Spanning Trees624
23.1   Growing a minimum spanning tree625
23.2   The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim631

Contentsix
24  Single-Source Shortest Paths643
24.1   The Bellman-Ford algorithm651
24.2   Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs655
24.3   Dijkstra’s algorithm658
24.4   Difference constraints and shortest paths664
24.5   Proofs of shortest-paths properties671
25  All-Pairs Shortest Paths684
25.1   Shortest paths and matrix multiplication686
25.2   The Floyd-Warshall algorithm693
25.3   Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs700
26  Maximum Flow708
26.1   Flow networks709
26.2   The Ford-Fulkerson method714
26.3   Maximum bipartite matching732
?26.4   Push-relabel algorithms736
?26.5   The relabel-to-front algorithm748
VII  Selected Topics
Introduction769
27  Multithreaded Algorithms772
27.1   The basics of dynamic multithreading774
27.2   Multithreaded matrix multiplication792
27.3   Multithreaded merge sort797
28  Matrix Operations813
28.1   Solving systems of linear equations813
28.2   Inverting matrices827
28.3   Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares approximation
832
29  Linear Programming843
29.1   Standard and slack forms850
29.2   Formulating problems as linear programs859
29.3   The simplex algorithm864
29.4   Duality879
29.5   The initial basic feasible solution886

xContents
30  Polynomials and the FFT898
30.1   Representing polynomials900
30.2   The DFT and FFT906
30.3   Efficient FFT implementations915
31  Number-Theoretic Algorithms926
31.1   Elementary number-theoretic notions927
31.2   Greatest common divisor933
31.3   Modular arithmetic939
31.4   Solving modular linear equations946
31.5   The Chinese remainder theorem950
31.6   Powers of an element954
31.7   The RSA public-key cryptosystem958
?31.8   Primality testing965
?31.9   Integer factorization975
32  String Matching985
32.1   The naive string-matching algorithm988
32.2   The Rabin-Karp algorithm990
32.3   String matching with finite automata995
?32.4   The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm1002
33  Computational Geometry1014
33.1   Line-segment properties1015
33.2   Determining whether any pair of segments intersects1021
33.3   Finding the convex hull1029
33.4   Finding the closest pair of points1039
34  NP-Completeness1048
34.1   Polynomial time1053
34.2   Polynomial-time verification1061
34.3   NP-completeness and reducibility1067
34.4   NP-completeness proofs1078
34.5   NP-complete problems1086
35  Approximation Algorithms1106
35.1   The vertex-cover problem1108
35.2   The traveling-salesman problem1111
35.3   The set-covering problem1117
35.4   Randomization and linear programming1123
35.5   The subset-sum problem1128

Contentsxi
VIII  Appendix: Mathematical Background
Introduction1143
A   Summations1145
A.1    Summation formulas and properties1145
A.2    Bounding summations1149
B   Sets, Etc.1158
B.1Sets1158
B.2Relations1163
B.3Functions1166
B.4Graphs1168
B.5Trees1173
C   Counting and Probability1183
C.1Counting1183
C.2Probability1189
C.3Discrete random variables1196
C.4The geometric and binomial distributions1201
?C.5The tails of the binomial distribution1208
D   Matrices1217
D.1    Matrices and matrix operations1217
D.2    Basic matrix properties1222
Bibliography1231
Index1251



Preface
Before there were computers, there were algorithms.  But now that there are com-
puters, there are even more algorithms, and algorithms lie at the heart of computing.
This book provides a comprehensive introduction to the modern study of com-
puter  algorithms.   It presents  many  algorithms  and  covers  them  in  considerable
depth, yet makes their design and analysis accessible to all levels of readers.  We
have tried to keep explanations elementary without sacrificing depth of coverage
or mathematical rigor.
Each chapter presents an algorithm, a design technique, an application area, or a
related topic. Algorithms are described in English and in a pseudocode designed to
be readable by anyone who has done a little programming. The book contains 244
figures—many with multiple parts—illustrating  how the algorithms work.  Since
we emphasizeefficiencyas a design criterion,  we include careful analyses of the
running times of all our algorithms.
The text is intended primarily for use in undergraduate  or graduate courses in
algorithms or data structures. Because it discusses engineering issues in algorithm
design, as well as mathematical aspects, it is equally well suited for self-study by
technical professionals.
In  this,  the  third  edition,  we  have  once  again  updated  the  entire  book.   The
changes cover a broad spectrum, including new chapters, revised pseudocode, and
a more active writing style.
To the teacher
We have designed this book to be both versatile and complete.  You should find it
useful for a variety of courses, from an undergraduate course in data structures up
through a graduate course in algorithms.  Because we have provided considerably
more material than can fit in a typical one-term course, you can consider this book
to be a “buffet” or “smorgasbord” from which you can pick and choose the material
that best supports the course you wish to teach.

xivPreface
You should  find it  easy  to  organize  your  course  around  just  the chapters  you
need. We have made chapters relatively self-contained, so that you need not worry
about an unexpected and unnecessary dependence of one chapter on another. Each
chapter presents the easier material first and the more difficult material later, with
section boundaries marking natural stopping points.  In an undergraduate course,
you might use only the earlier sections from a chapter; in a graduate course, you
might cover the entire chapter.
We have included 957 exercises and 158 problems. Each section ends with exer-
cises, and each chapter ends with problems. The exercises are generally short ques-
tions that test basic mastery of the material.  Some are simple self-check thought
exercises, whereas others are more substantial and are suitable as assigned home-
work.  The problems are more elaborate case studies that often introduce new ma-
terial; they often consist of several questions that lead the student through the steps
required to arrive at a solution.
Departing  from our  practice  in previous  editions  of this book,  we have made
publicly available solutions to some, but by no means all, of the problems and ex-
ercises. Our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links to these solutions.
You will want to check this site to make sure that it does not contain the solution to
an exercise or problem that you plan to assign.  We expect the set of solutions that
we post to grow slowly over time, so you will need to check it each time you teach
the course.
We have starred (?) the sections and exercises that are more suitable for graduate
students than for undergraduates.  A starred section is not necessarily more diffi-
cult than an unstarred one, but it may require an understanding of more advanced
mathematics.  Likewise, starred exercises may require an advanced background or
more than average creativity.
To the student
We  hope  that  this  textbook  provides  you  with  an  enjoyable  introduction  to  the
field of algorithms.   We have attempted  to make every algorithm  accessible  and
interesting. To help you when you encounter unfamiliar or difficult algorithms, we
describe each one in a step-by-step manner.  We also provide careful explanations
of  the mathematics  needed  to understand  the analysis  of  the algorithms.   If you
already have some familiarity with a topic, you will find the chapters organized so
that you can skim introductory sections and proceed quickly to the more advanced
material.
This is a large book,  and your class will probably  cover  only a portion  of its
material.  We have tried, however, to make this a book that will be useful to you
now  as  a  course  textbook  and  also  later  in  your  career  as  a  mathematical  desk
reference or an engineering handbook.

Prefacexv
What are the prerequisites for reading this book?

You should have some programming experience.  In particular, you should un-
derstand  recursive  procedures  and  simple  data  structures  such  as  arrays  and
linked lists.

You should have some facility with mathematical proofs, and especially proofs
by mathematical induction. A few portions of the book rely on some knowledge
of elementary calculus. Beyond that, Parts I and VIII of this book teach you all
the mathematical techniques you will need.
We  have  heard,  loud  and  clear,  the  call  to  supply  solutions  to  problems  and
exercises.  Our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links to solutions for
a few of the problems and exercises. Feel free to check your solutions against ours.
We ask, however, that you do not send your solutions to us.
To the professional
The wide range  of topics  in this book  makes it  an excellent  handbook  on algo-
rithms.  Because each chapter is relatively self-contained, you can focus in on the
topics that most interest you.
Most  of  the  algorithms  we  discuss  have  great  practical  utility.   We  therefore
address implementation concerns and other engineering issues.  We often provide
practical alternatives to the few algorithms that are primarily of theoretical interest.
If  you wish  to implement  any of  the algorithms,  you  should  find the  transla-
tion  of  our  pseudocode  into  your  favorite  programming  language  to  be  a  fairly
straightforward task.  We have designed the pseudocode to present each algorithm
clearly and succinctly.  Consequently, we do not address error-handling and other
software-engineering issues that require specific assumptions about your program-
ming environment. We attempt to present each algorithm simply and directly with-
out allowing the idiosyncrasies of a particular programming language to obscure
its essence.
We  understand  that  if  you  are  using  this  book  outside  of  a  course,  then  you
might be unable to check your solutions to problems and exercises against solutions
provided by an instructor.  Our Web site, http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/, links
to solutions  for some of the problems and exercises  so that  you can check your
work. Please do not send your solutions to us.
To our colleagues
We have supplied an extensive bibliography and pointers to the current literature.
Each chapter ends with a set of chapter notes that give historical details and ref-
erences.  The chapter notes do not provide a complete reference to the whole field

xviPreface
of algorithms, however.  Though it may be hard to believe for a book of this size,
space constraints prevented us from including many interesting algorithms.
Despite myriad requests from students for solutions to problems and exercises,
we have chosen as a matter of policy not to supply references  for problems and
exercises, to remove the temptation for students to look up a solution rather than to
find it themselves.
Changes for the third edition
What has changed between the second and third editions of this book?  The mag-
nitude of the changes is on a par with the changes between the first and second
editions.   As we said  about  the  second-edition  changes,  depending  on  how  you
look at it, the book changed either not much or quite a bit.
A quick look at the table of contents shows that most of the second-edition chap-
ters and sections appear  in the third edition.  We removed two chapters and one
section,  but we have added three new chapters and two new sections apart from
these new chapters.
We kept the hybrid organization from the first two editions. Rather than organiz-
ing chapters by only problem domains or according only to techniques, this book
has elements of both. It contains technique-based chapters on divide-and-conquer,
dynamic programming, greedy algorithms, amortized analysis, NP-Completeness,
and  approximation  algorithms.   But  it  also  has  entire  parts  on  sorting,  on  data
structures for dynamic sets, and on algorithms for graph problems.  We find that
although you need to know how to apply techniques for designing and analyzing al-
gorithms, problems seldom announce to you which techniques are most amenable
to solving them.
Here is a summary of the most significant changes for the third edition:

We added new chapters on van Emde Boas trees and multithreaded algorithms,
and we have broken out material on matrix basics into its own appendix chapter.

We revised the chapter on recurrences  to more broadly cover the divide-and-
conquer technique, and its first two sections apply divide-and-conquer to solve
two problems. The second section of this chapter presents Strassen’s algorithm
for matrix multiplication,  which we have moved from  the chapter  on matrix
operations.

We removed two chapters that were rarely taught:  binomial heaps and sorting
networks.  One key idea in the sorting networks chapter, the 0-1 principle, ap-
pears in this edition within Problem 8-7 as the 0-1 sorting lemma for compare-
exchange  algorithms.   The  treatment  of  Fibonacci  heaps  no  longer  relies  on
binomial heaps as a precursor.

Prefacexvii

We revised our treatment of dynamic programming and greedy algorithms. Dy-
namic programming now leads off with a more interesting problem, rod cutting,
than the assembly-line scheduling problem from the second edition.  Further-
more, we emphasize memoization a bit more than we did in the second edition,
and we introduce the notion of the subproblem graph as a way to understand
the running time of a dynamic-programming algorithm.  In our opening exam-
ple of greedy algorithms, the activity-selection problem, we get to the greedy
algorithm more directly than we did in the second edition.

The way we delete a node from binary search trees (which includes red-black
trees) now guarantees  that the node requested for deletion is the node that is
actually  deleted.   In the first two editions,  in certain  cases,  some other  node
would be deleted, with its contents moving into the node passed to the deletion
procedure. With our new way to delete nodes, if other components of a program
maintain pointers to nodes in the tree, they will not mistakenly end up with stale
pointers to nodes that have been deleted.

The material  on flow networks  now bases  flows entirely  on edges.   This ap-
proach is more intuitive than the net flow used in the first two editions.

With  the  material  on  matrix  basics  and  Strassen’s  algorithm  moved  to  other
chapters, the chapter on matrix operations is smaller than in the second edition.

We have modified our treatment of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt string-matching al-
gorithm.

We corrected several errors.  Most of these errors were posted on our Web site
of second-edition errata, but a few were not.

Based on many requests, we changed the syntax (as it were) of our pseudocode.
We now use “D” to indicate assignment and “
==” to test for equality, just as C,
C++, Java, and Python do. Likewise, we have eliminated the keywordsdoand
thenand adopted “//” as our comment-to-end-of-line symbol. We also now use
dot-notation to indicate object attributes.  Our pseudocode remains procedural,
rather  than  object-oriented.   In other  words,  rather  than  running  methods  on
objects, we simply call procedures, passing objects as parameters.

We added  100 new  exercises  and 28 new  problems.   We also  updated  many
bibliography entries and added several new ones.

Finally,  we went through  the entire book and rewrote sentences,  paragraphs,
and sections to make the writing clearer and more active.

xviiiPreface
Web site
You  can  use our  Web site,  http://mitpress.mit.edu/algorithms/,  to obtain  supple-
mentary information and to communicate with us.  The Web site links to a list of
known errors, solutions to selected exercises and problems, and (of course) a list
explaining the corny professor jokes, as well as other content that we might add.
The Web site also tells you how to report errors or make suggestions.
How we produced this book
Like the second edition, the third edition was produced in L
A
T
E
X2
"
.  We used the
Times font with mathematics typeset using the MathTime Pro 2 fonts.  We thank
Michael  Spivak from  Publish or  Perish,  Inc.,  Lance Carnes from Personal  TeX,
Inc., and Tim Tregubov from Dartmouth College for technical support.  As in the
previous two editions, we compiled the index using Windex, a C program that we
wrote,  and the bibliography  was produced with B
IBT
E
X.  The PDF files for this
book were created on a MacBook running OS 10.5.
We drew the illustrations for the third edition using MacDraw Pro, with some
of  the  mathematical  expressions  in  illustrations  laid  in  with  the  psfrag  package
for  L
A
T
E
X2
"
.   Unfortunately,  MacDraw  Pro is  legacy  software,  having  not  been
marketed for over a decade now.  Happily, we still have a couple of Macintoshes
that can run the Classic environment under OS 10.4, and hence they can run Mac-
Draw Pro—mostly. Even under the Classic environment, we find MacDraw Pro to
be far easier to use than any other drawing software for the types of illustrations
that  accompany  computer-science  text,  and  it  produces  beautiful  output.
1
Who
knows how long our pre-Intel Macs will continue to run, so if anyone from Apple
is listening:Please create an OS X-compatible version of MacDraw Pro!
Acknowledgments for the third edition
We have been working with the MIT Press for over two decades now, and what a
terrific relationship it has been!  We thank Ellen Faran, Bob Prior, Ada Brunstein,
and Mary Reilly for their help and support.
We were geographically distributed while producing the third edition, working
in the Dartmouth College Department  of Computer Science,  the MIT Computer
1
We investigated several drawing programs that run under Mac OS X, but all had significant short-
comings  compared with MacDraw Pro.  We briefly attempted to produce  the illustrations for this
book with a different, well known drawing program. We found that it took at least five times as long
to produce each illustration as it took with MacDraw Pro, and the resulting illustrations did not look
as good. Hence the decision to revert to MacDraw Pro running on older Macintoshes.

Prefacexix
Science and Artificial Intelligence  Laboratory,  and the Columbia University De-
partment  of  Industrial  Engineering  and  Operations  Research.   We thank  our  re-
spective universities and colleagues for providing such supportive and stimulating
environments.
Julie Sussman, P.P.A., once again bailed us out as the technical copyeditor. Time
and again, we were amazed at the errors that eluded us, but that Julie caught.  She
also helped us improve our presentation in several places. If there is a Hall of Fame
for technical copyeditors, Julie is a sure-fire, first-ballot inductee.  She is nothing
short of phenomenal. Thank you, thank you, thank you, Julie! Priya Natarajan also
found some errors that we were able to correct before this book went to press. Any
errors that remain (and undoubtedly, some do) are the responsibility of the authors
(and probably were inserted after Julie read the material).
The  treatment  for  van  Emde  Boas  trees  derives  from  Erik  Demaine’s  notes,
which  were  in  turn  influenced  by  Michael  Bender.   We  also  incorporated  ideas
from Javed Aslam, Bradley Kuszmaul, and Hui Zha into this edition.
The chapter on multithreading was based on notes originally written jointly with
Harald Prokop. The material was influenced by several others working on the Cilk
project at MIT, including Bradley Kuszmaul and Matteo Frigo.  The design of the
multithreaded pseudocode took its inspiration from the MIT Cilk extensions to C
and by Cilk Arts’s Cilk++ extensions to C++.
We also thank the many readers of the first and second editions who reported
errors or submitted suggestions for how to improve this book. We corrected all the
bona fide errors that were reported, and we incorporated as many suggestions as
we could. We rejoice that the number of such contributors has grown so great that
we must regret that it has become impractical to list them all.
Finally,  we thank our wives—Nicole Cormen,  Wendy Leiserson,  Gail Rivest,
and Rebecca Ivry—and our children—Ricky,  Will,  Debby,  and Katie Leiserson;
Alex and Christopher Rivest; and Molly, Noah, and Benjamin Stein—for their love
and support while we prepared this book. The patience and encouragement of our
families made this project possible. We affectionately dedicate this book to them.
T
HOMASH. CORMENLebanon, New Hampshire
C
HARLESE. LEISERSONCambridge, Massachusetts
R
ONALDL. RIVESTCambridge, Massachusetts
C
LIFFORDSTEINNew York, New York
February 2009



Introduction to Algorithms
Third Edition

I  Foundations

Introduction
This part will start you thinking about designing and analyzing algorithms.  It is
intended  to be a gentle  introduction  to how we specify  algorithms,  some of the
design strategies we will use throughout this book, and many of the fundamental
ideas used in algorithm analysis. Later parts of this book will build upon this base.
Chapter 1 provides an overview of algorithms and their place in modern com-
puting systems. This chapter defines what an algorithm is and lists some examples.
It also makes a case that we should consider  algorithms  as a technology,  along-
side technologies such as fast hardware, graphical user interfaces, object-oriented
systems, and networks.
In Chapter 2,  we see our first algorithms,  which solve the problem  of sorting
a sequence ofnnumbers.  They are written in a pseudocode which, although not
directly translatable to any conventional programming language, conveys the struc-
ture of the algorithm clearly enough that you should be able to implement it in the
language  of your  choice.   The sorting algorithms  we examine are insertion  sort,
which uses an incremental approach, and merge sort, which uses a recursive tech-
nique known as “divide-and-conquer.”  Although the time each requires increases
with the value ofn, the rate of increase differs between the two algorithms.  We
determine these running times in Chapter 2, and we develop a useful notation to
express them.
Chapter 3 precisely defines this notation, which we call asymptotic notation.  It
starts by defining several asymptotic notations, which we use for bounding algo-
rithm running times from above and/or below.  The rest of Chapter 3 is primarily
a presentation of mathematical notation, more to ensure that your use of notation
matches that in this book than to teach you new mathematical concepts.

4Part I    Foundations
Chapter  4  delves  further  into  the  divide-and-conquer  method  introduced  in
Chapter 2.  It provides additional examples of divide-and-conquer  algorithms, in-
cluding Strassen’s surprising method for multiplying two square matrices.  Chap-
ter  4 contains  methods  for  solving  recurrences,  which  are  useful  for  describing
the running times of recursive algorithms.  One powerful technique  is the “mas-
ter method,” which we often use to solve recurrences that arise from divide-and-
conquer algorithms.  Although much of Chapter 4 is devoted to proving the cor-
rectness of the master method, you may skip this proof yet still employ the master
method.
Chapter 5 introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms. We typ-
ically use probabilistic analysis to determine the running time of an algorithm in
cases  in  which,  due  to  the  presence  of  an  inherent  probability  distribution,  the
running time may differ on different inputs of the same size.  In some cases, we
assume that the inputs conform to a known probability distribution, so that we are
averaging the running time over all possible inputs.  In other cases, the probability
distribution comes not from the inputs but from random choices made during the
course of the algorithm. An algorithm whose behavior is determined not only by its
input but by the values produced by a random-number generator is a randomized
algorithm. We can use randomized algorithms to enforce a probability distribution
on the inputs—thereby ensuring that no particular input always causes poor perfor-
mance—or even to bound the error rate of algorithms that are allowed to produce
incorrect results on a limited basis.
Appendices A–D contain other mathematical material that you will find helpful
as you read this  book.   You are likely  to have seen much of the material in the
appendix chapters before having read this book (although the specific definitions
and notational conventions we use may differ in some cases from what you have
seen in the past), and so you should think of the Appendices as reference material.
On the  other  hand,  you  probably  have  not  already  seen  most  of  the  material  in
Part I.   All the chapters  in Part I and the Appendices  are written with a tutorial
flavor.

1The Role of Algorithms in Computing
What are algorithms? Why is the study of algorithms worthwhile? What is the role
of algorithms relative to other technologies used in computers? In this chapter, we
will answer these questions.
1.1  Algorithms
Informally,  analgorithmis any well-defined computational  procedure that takes
some value, or set of values, asinputand produces some value, or set of values, as
output. An algorithm is thus a sequence of computational steps that transform the
input into the output.
We can also view an algorithm as a tool for solving a well-specifiedcomputa-
tional problem. The statement of the problem specifies in general terms the desired
input/output relationship. The algorithm describes a specific computational proce-
dure for achieving that input/output relationship.
For example, we might need to sort a sequence of numbers into nondecreasing
order.  This problem arises frequently in practice and provides fertile ground for
introducing many standard design techniques and analysis tools.  Here is how we
formally define thesorting problem:
Input:A sequence ofnnumbersha
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
i.
Output:A permutation (reordering)ha
0
1
;a
0
2
;:::;a
0
n
iof the input sequence such
thata
0
1
a
0
2
a
0
n
.
For example, given the input sequenceh31; 41; 59; 26; 41; 58i, a sorting algorithm
returns as output the sequenceh26; 31; 41; 41; 58; 59i.  Such an input sequence is
called aninstanceof the sorting problem.  In general,  aninstance of a problem
consists of the input (satisfying whatever constraints are imposed in the problem
statement) needed to compute a solution to the problem.

6Chapter 1The Role of Algorithms in Computing
Because many programs use it as an intermediate step, sorting is a fundamental
operation in computer science. As a result, we have a large number of good sorting
algorithms at our disposal. Which algorithm is best for a given application depends
on—among other factors—the number of items to be sorted, the extent to which
the  items  are already  somewhat  sorted,  possible  restrictions  on the  item  values,
the architecture of the computer, and the kind of storage devices to be used:  main
memory, disks, or even tapes.
An algorithm is said to becorrectif, for every input instance, it halts with the
correct  output.   We say  that  a correct  algorithmsolvesthe  given  computational
problem. An incorrect algorithm might not halt at all on some input instances, or it
might halt with an incorrect answer. Contrary to what you might expect, incorrect
algorithms can sometimes be useful, if we can control their error rate. We shall see
an example of an algorithm with a controllable error rate in Chapter 31 when we
study algorithms for finding large prime numbers.  Ordinarily, however, we shall
be concerned only with correct algorithms.
An algorithm  can be specified in English,  as a computer  program,  or even as
a hardware design.  The only requirement is that the specification must provide a
precise description of the computational procedure to be followed.
What kinds of problems are solved by algorithms?
Sorting is by no means the only computational problem for which algorithms have
been developed.  (You probably suspected as much when you saw the size of this
book.)  Practical applications of algorithms are ubiquitous and include the follow-
ing examples:

The Human Genome Project has made great progress toward the goals of iden-
tifying all the 100,000 genes in human DNA, determining the sequences of the
3 billion chemical base pairs that make up human DNA, storing this informa-
tion in databases,  and developing tools for data analysis.  Each of these steps
requires sophisticated algorithms.  Although the solutions to the various prob-
lems involved are beyond the scope of this book, many methods to solve these
biological problems use ideas from several of the chapters in this book, thereby
enabling scientists to accomplish tasks while using resources efficiently.  The
savings are in time, both human and machine, and in money, as more informa-
tion can be extracted from laboratory techniques.

The Internet enables people all around the world to quickly access and retrieve
large amounts of information.  With the aid of clever algorithms,  sites on the
Internet are able to manage and manipulate this large volume of data. Examples
of problems that make essential use of algorithms include finding good routes
on which the data will travel (techniques for solving such problems appear in

1.1Algorithms7
Chapter 24), and using a search engine to quickly find pages on which particular
information resides (related techniques are in Chapters 11 and 32).

Electronic  commerce  enables  goods  and  services  to  be  negotiated  and  ex-
changed  electronically,  and  it  depends  on  the  privacy  of  personal  informa-
tion such as credit card numbers,  passwords,  and bank statements.  The core
technologies used in electronic commerce include public-key cryptography and
digital signatures (covered in Chapter 31), which are based on numerical algo-
rithms and number theory.

Manufacturing and other commercial enterprises often need to allocate scarce
resources in the most beneficial way. An oil company may wish to know where
to place its wells in order to maximize its expected profit. A political candidate
may want to determine where to spend money buying campaign advertising in
order  to maximize the chances of winning an election.   An airline may wish
to assign crews to flights in the least expensive way possible, making sure that
each flight is covered and that government regulations regarding crew schedul-
ing are met. An Internet service provider may wish to determine where to place
additional  resources  in  order  to  serve  its  customers  more effectively.   All of
these are examples of problems that can be solved using linear programming,
which we shall study in Chapter 29.
Although  some of  the  details  of  these  examples  are beyond  the scope  of  this
book, we do give underlying techniques that apply to these problems and problem
areas. We also show how to solve many specific problems, including the following:

We are given a road map on which the distance between each pair of adjacent
intersections is marked, and we wish to determine the shortest route from one
intersection to another.  The number of possible routes can be huge, even if we
disallow  routes that  cross  over themselves.   How do we choose  which of  all
possible routes is the shortest?  Here, we model the road map (which is itself
a model  of  the actual  roads)  as a graph  (which we will meet in Part VI and
Appendix B), and we wish to find the shortest path from one vertex to another
in the graph. We shall see how to solve this problem efficiently in Chapter 24.

We are given two ordered sequences of symbols,XDhx
1
;x
2
; :::;x
m
iand
YDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
i, and we wish to find a longest common subsequence of
XandY. A subsequence ofXis justXwith some (or possibly all or none) of
its elements removed. For example, one subsequence ofhA; B; C; D; E; F; Gi
would behB; C; E; Gi.  The length of a longest common subsequence  ofX
andYgives one measure of how similar these two sequences are. For example,
if the two sequences  are base pairs in DNA strands,  then we might  consider
them similar if they have a long common subsequence.  IfXhasmsymbols
andYhasnsymbols,  thenXandYhave2
m
and2
n
possible subsequences,

8Chapter 1The Role of Algorithms in Computing
respectively.   Selecting  all  possible  subsequences  ofXandYand  matching
them up could take a prohibitively  long time unlessmandnare very small.
We shall see in Chapter 15 how to use a general technique known as dynamic
programming to solve this problem much more efficiently.

We are given a mechanical design in terms of a library of parts, where each part
may include instances of other parts, and we need to list the parts in order so
that each part appears before any part that uses it.  If the design comprisesn
parts, then there arenŠpossible orders, wherenŠdenotes the factorial function.
Because the factorial function grows faster than even an exponential function,
we cannot  feasibly  generate  each  possible  order  and  then  verify  that,  within
that order,  each part appears before the parts using it (unless we have only a
few parts). This problem is an instance of topological sorting, and we shall see
in Chapter 22 how to solve this problem efficiently.

We are  givennpoints  in  the  plane,  and  we wish  to  find  the  convex  hull  of
these points.   The convex  hull is the smallest  convex polygon  containing  the
points.  Intuitively,  we can think of each point as being represented by a nail
sticking  out  from a board.   The convex hull  would be represented  by a tight
rubber  band that  surrounds  all the nails.   Each nail  around  which the rubber
band makes a turn is a vertex of the convex hull. (See Figure 33.6 on page 1029
for  an  example.)   Any  of  the2
n
subsets  of  the  points  might  be  the  vertices
of the convex hull.   Knowing which points are vertices of the convex hull is
not quite enough,  either, since we also need to know the order in which they
appear.  There are many choices, therefore, for the vertices of the convex hull.
Chapter 33 gives two good methods for finding the convex hull.
These lists are far from exhaustive (as you again have probably surmised from
this book’s heft), but exhibit two characteristics that are common to many interest-
ing algorithmic problems:
1.   They have many candidate solutions, the overwhelming majority of which do
not solve the problem at hand. Finding one that does, or one that is “best,” can
present quite a challenge.
2.   They have practical applications.  Of the problems in the above list, finding the
shortest  path provides the easiest examples.  A transportation  firm, such as a
trucking or railroad company, has a financial interest in finding shortest paths
through  a  road  or  rail  network  because  taking  shorter  paths  results  in  lower
labor and fuel costs.  Or a routing node on the Internet  may need to find the
shortest  path through  the network in order  to route a message quickly.   Or a
person  wishing to drive from  New York to Boston may want to find driving
directions from an appropriate Web site, or she may use her GPS while driving.

1.1Algorithms9
Not every problem solved by algorithms has an easily identified set of candidate
solutions.  For example, suppose we are given a set of numerical values represent-
ing samples of a signal, and we want to compute the discrete Fourier transform of
these samples. The discrete Fourier transform converts the time domain to the fre-
quency domain, producing a set of numerical coefficients, so that we can determine
the strength of various frequencies in the sampled signal.  In addition to lying at
the heart of signal processing, discrete Fourier transforms have applications in data
compression  and  multiplying  large  polynomials  and  integers.   Chapter  30  gives
an efficient algorithm, the fast Fouriertransform (commonly called theFFT), for
this problem, and the chapter also sketches out the design of a hardware circuit to
compute the FFT.
Data structures
This book also contains several data structures.  Adata structureis a way to store
and organize data in order to facilitate access and modifications.  No single data
structure works well for all purposes, and so it is important to know the strengths
and limitations of several of them.
Technique
Although you can use this book as a “cookbook” for algorithms, you may someday
encounter a problem for which you cannot readily find a published algorithm (many
of the exercises and problems in this book, for example). This book will teach you
techniques of algorithm design and analysis so that you can develop algorithms on
your own, show that they give the correct answer, and understand their efficiency.
Different chapters address different aspects of algorithmic problem solving. Some
chapters address specific problems, such as finding medians and order statistics in
Chapter 9, computing minimum spanning trees in Chapter 23, and determining a
maximum flow in a network  in Chapter  26.   Other  chapters  address  techniques,
such as divide-and-conquer  in Chapter  4,  dynamic  programming  in Chapter  15,
and amortized analysis in Chapter 17.
Hard problems
Most of this book is about efficient algorithms.  Our usual measure of efficiency
is speed, i.e., how long an algorithm takes to produce its result.  There are some
problems, however, for which no efficient solution is known.  Chapter 34 studies
an interesting subset of these problems, which are known as NP-complete.
Why are NP-complete problems interesting?  First, although no efficient algo-
rithm for an NP-complete problem has ever been found, nobody has ever proven

10Chapter 1The Role of Algorithms in Computing
that  an  efficient  algorithm  for  one  cannot  exist.   In  other  words,  no  one  knows
whether or not efficient algorithms exist for NP-complete problems.  Second, the
set of NP-complete problems has the remarkable property that if an efficient algo-
rithm exists for any one of them, then efficient algorithms exist for all of them. This
relationship among the NP-complete problems makes the lack of efficient solutions
all the more tantalizing.  Third, several NP-complete problems are similar, but not
identical,  to problems for which we do know of efficient algorithms.   Computer
scientists are intrigued by how a small change to the problem statement can cause
a big change to the efficiency of the best known algorithm.
You should know about NP-complete problems because some of them arise sur-
prisingly often in real applications.  If you are called upon to produce an efficient
algorithm for an NP-complete problem, you are likely to spend a lot of time in a
fruitless search. If you can show that the problem is NP-complete, you can instead
spend your time developing an efficient algorithm that gives a good,  but not the
best possible, solution.
As a concrete example, consider a delivery company with a central depot. Each
day, it loads up each delivery truck at the depot and sends it around to deliver goods
to several addresses. At the end of the day, each truck must end up back at the depot
so that it is ready to be loaded for the next day. To reduce costs, the company wants
to select an order of delivery stops that yields the lowest overall distance traveled
by each truck. This problem is the well-known “traveling-salesman problem,” and
it is NP-complete. It has no known efficient algorithm. Under certain assumptions,
however,  we know of efficient  algorithms  that  give an overall  distance  which is
not too far above the smallest possible. Chapter 35 discusses such “approximation
algorithms.”
Parallelism
For many years, we could count on processor clock speeds increasing at a steady
rate. Physical limitations present a fundamental roadblock to ever-increasing clock
speeds, however: because power density increases superlinearly with clock speed,
chips run the risk of melting once their clock speeds become high enough. In order
to perform more computations per second, therefore, chips are being designed to
contain not just one but several processing “cores.”  We can liken these multicore
computers to several sequential computers on a single chip; in other words, they are
a type of “parallel computer.” In order to elicit the best performance from multicore
computers,  we need to design  algorithms  with parallelism  in mind.   Chapter 27
presents a model for “multithreaded” algorithms, which take advantage of multiple
cores.  This model has advantages from a theoretical standpoint, and it forms the
basis  of  several  successful  computer  programs,  including  a championship  chess
program.

1.2Algorithms as a technology11
Exercises
1.1-1
Give a real-world example that requires sorting or a real-world example that re-
quires computing a convex hull.
1.1-2
Other than speed, what other measures of efficiency might one use in a real-world
setting?
1.1-3
Select a data structure that you have seen previously, and discuss its strengths and
limitations.
1.1-4
How are the shortest-path and traveling-salesman  problems given above similar?
How are they different?
1.1-5
Come up with a real-world problem in which only the best solution will do.  Then
come  up  with  one  in  which  a solution  that  is  “approximately”  the  best  is  good
enough.
1.2  Algorithms as a technology
Suppose computers  were infinitely  fast and computer  memory was free.   Would
you have any reason to study algorithms? The answer is yes, if for no other reason
than that you would still like to demonstrate that your solution method terminates
and does so with the correct answer.
If  computers  were  infinitely  fast,  any  correct  method  for  solving  a  problem
would do. You would probably want your implementation to be within the bounds
of good software engineering practice (for example, your implementation should
be  well  designed  and  documented),  but  you  would  most  often  use  whichever
method was the easiest to implement.
Of course, computers may be fast, but they are not infinitely fast.  And memory
may be  inexpensive,  but  it  is  not  free.   Computing  time  is  therefore  a bounded
resource, and so is space in memory.  You should use these resources wisely, and
algorithms that are efficient in terms of time or space will help you do so.

12Chapter 1The Role of Algorithms in Computing
Efficiency
Different algorithms devised to solve the same problem often differ dramatically in
their efficiency.  These differences can be much more significant than differences
due to hardware and software.
As an example, in Chapter 2, we will see two algorithms for sorting.  The first,
known asinsertion sort, takes time roughly equal toc
1
n
2
to sortnitems, wherec
1
is a constant that does not depend onn. That is, it takes time roughly proportional
ton
2
.  The second,merge sort,  takes time roughly equal toc
2
nlgn, where lgn
stands for log
2
nandc
2
is another constant that also does not depend onn.  Inser-
tion sort typically has a smaller constant factor than merge sort, so thatc
1
<c
2
.
We shall see that the constant factors can have far less of an impact on the running
time than the dependence on the input sizen.  Let’s write insertion sort’s running
time asc
1
nnand merge sort’s running time asc
2
nlgn. Then we see that where
insertion sort has a factor ofnin its running time, merge sort has a factor of lgn,
which is much smaller.  (For example, whennD1000,lgnis approximately10,
and whennequals one million, lgnis approximately only20.) Although insertion
sort usually runs faster than merge sort for small input sizes, once the input sizen
becomes large enough, merge sort’s advantage of lgnvs.nwill more than com-
pensate for the difference in constant factors.  No matter how much smallerc
1
is
thanc
2
, there will always be a crossover point beyond which merge sort is faster.
For a concrete example, let us pit a faster computer (computer A) running inser-
tion sort against a slower computer (computer B) running merge sort.  They each
must sort an array of 10 million numbers.  (Although 10 million numbers might
seem  like  a  lot,  if  the  numbers  are  eight-byte  integers,  then  the  input  occupies
about 80 megabytes, which fits in the memory of even an inexpensive laptop com-
puter many times over.)  Suppose that computer A executes 10 billion instructions
per second (faster than any single sequential computer at the time of this writing)
and  computer  B executes  only  10  million  instructions  per  second,  so  that  com-
puter A is 1000 times faster than computer B in raw computing power.  To make
the difference even more dramatic, suppose that the world’s craftiest programmer
codes insertion sort in machine language for computer A, and the resulting code
requires2n
2
instructions to sortnnumbers.  Suppose further that just an average
programmer implements merge sort, using a high-level language with an inefficient
compiler, with the resulting code taking50nlgninstructions.  To sort 10 million
numbers, computer A takes
2.10
7
/
2
instructions
10
10
instructions/second
D20,000 seconds (more than 5.5 hours);
while computer B takes

1.2Algorithms as a technology13
5010
7
lg10
7
instructions
10
7
instructions/second
1163 seconds (less than 20 minutes):
By using an algorithm whose running time grows more slowly, even with a poor
compiler, computer B runs more than 17 times faster than computer A! The advan-
tage of merge sort is even more pronounced when we sort 100 million numbers:
where insertion sort takes more than 23 days, merge sort takes under four hours.
In general, as the problem size increases, so does the relative advantage of merge
sort.
Algorithms and other technologies
The example above shows that we should consider algorithms, like computer hard-
ware, as atechnology.  Total system performance  depends on choosing efficient
algorithms as much as on choosing fast hardware. Just as rapid advances are being
made in other computer technologies, they are being made in algorithms as well.
You might wonder whether algorithms are truly that important on contemporary
computers in light of other advanced technologies, such as

advanced computer architectures and fabrication technologies,

easy-to-use, intuitive, graphical user interfaces (GUIs),

object-oriented systems,

integrated Web technologies, and

fast networking, both wired and wireless.
The answer is yes.  Although some applications do not explicitly require algorith-
mic content at the application level (such as some simple, Web-based applications),
many do. For example, consider a Web-based service that determines how to travel
from one location to another.  Its implementation would rely on fast hardware, a
graphical  user  interface,  wide-area  networking,  and  also  possibly  on  object  ori-
entation.  However,  it would also require algorithms for certain operations,  such
as finding routes (probably using a shortest-path algorithm), rendering maps, and
interpolating addresses.
Moreover, even an application that does not require algorithmic content at the
application level relies heavily upon algorithms.  Does the application rely on fast
hardware?   The hardware  design  used algorithms.   Does the application  rely  on
graphical user interfaces?  The design of any GUI relies on algorithms.  Does the
application rely on networking? Routing in networks relies heavily on algorithms.
Was the application written in a language other than machine code?  Then it was
processed by a compiler, interpreter, or assembler, all of which make extensive use

14Chapter 1The Role of Algorithms in Computing
of algorithms.  Algorithms are at the core of most technologies used in contempo-
rary computers.
Furthermore, with the ever-increasing capacities of computers, we use them to
solve larger problems than ever before.  As we saw in the above comparison be-
tween insertion sort and merge sort, it is at larger problem sizes that the differences
in efficiency between algorithms become particularly prominent.
Having a solid base of algorithmic knowledge and technique is one characteristic
that separates the truly skilled programmers from the novices.  With modern com-
puting technology,  you can accomplish some tasks without knowing much about
algorithms,  but with a good background  in algorithms,  you can do much,  much
more.
Exercises
1.2-1
Give an example of an application that requires algorithmic content at the applica-
tion level, and discuss the function of the algorithms involved.
1.2-2
Suppose we are comparing implementations of insertion sort and merge sort on the
same machine.  For inputs of sizen, insertion sort runs in8n
2
steps, while merge
sort runs in64nlgnsteps.  For which values ofndoes insertion sort beat merge
sort?
1.2-3
What is the smallest value ofnsuch that an algorithm whose running time is100n
2
runs faster than an algorithm whose running time is2
n
on the same machine?
Problems
1-1  Comparison of running times
For each  functionf .n/and  timetin the  following  table,  determine  the largest
sizenof a problem that can be solved in timet, assuming that the algorithm to
solve the problem takesf .n/microseconds.

Notes for Chapter 115
1111111
secondminutehourdaymonthyearcentury
lgn
p
n
n
nlgn
n
2
n
3
2
n
nŠ
Chapter notes
There are many excellent texts on the general topic of algorithms, including those
by Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5, 6];  Baase and Van Gelder [28];  Brassard and
Bratley [54]; Dasgupta, Papadimitriou, and Vazirani [82]; Goodrich and Tamassia
[148];  Hofri [175];  Horowitz,  Sahni,  and Rajasekaran  [181];  Johnsonbaugh  and
Schaefer  [193];  Kingston  [205];  Kleinberg  and  Tardos  [208];  Knuth  [209, 210,
211]; Kozen [220]; Levitin [235]; Manber [242]; Mehlhorn [249, 250, 251]; Pur-
dom  and Brown [287];  Reingold,  Nievergelt,  and Deo [293];  Sedgewick [306];
Sedgewick and Flajolet [307];  Skiena [318];  and Wilf [356].  Some of the more
practical aspects of algorithm design are discussed by Bentley [42, 43] and Gonnet
[145]. Surveys of the field of algorithms can also be found in theHandbook of The-
oretical Computer Science, Volume A[342] and the CRCAlgorithms and Theory of
Computation Handbook[25].  Overviews of the algorithms used in computational
biology can be found in textbooks by Gusfield [156], Pevzner [275], Setubal and
Meidanis [310], and Waterman [350].

2Getting Started
This chapter will familiarize you with the framework we shall use throughout the
book to think about the design and analysis of algorithms.  It is self-contained, but
it does include several references to material that we introduce in Chapters 3 and 4.
(It also contains several summations, which Appendix A shows how to solve.)
We begin by examining the insertion sort algorithm to solve the sorting problem
introduced in Chapter 1. We define a “pseudocode” that should be familiar to you if
you have done computer programming, and we use it to show how we shall specify
our algorithms. Having specified the insertion sort algorithm, we then argue that it
correctly sorts, and we analyze its running time. The analysis introduces a notation
that  focuses  on  how  that  time  increases  with  the  number  of  items  to  be  sorted.
Following our  discussion  of insertion  sort,  we introduce  the divide-and-conquer
approach  to  the  design  of  algorithms  and  use  it  to  develop  an  algorithm  called
merge sort. We end with an analysis of merge sort’s running time.
2.1  Insertion sort
Our first algorithm, insertion sort, solves thesorting problemintroduced in Chap-
ter 1:
Input:A sequence ofnnumbersha
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
i.
Output:A permutation (reordering)ha
0
1
;a
0
2
;:::;a
0
n
iof the input sequence such
thata
0
1
a
0
2
a
0
n
.
The numbers that we wish to sort are also known as thekeys. Although conceptu-
ally we are sorting a sequence, the input comes to us in the form of an array withn
elements.
In  this  book,  we shall  typically  describe  algorithms  as  programs  written  in  a
pseudocodethat is similar in many respects to C, C++, Java, Python, or Pascal.  If
you have been introduced to any of these languages, you should have little trouble

2.1Insertion sort17
2
♣
♣
♣
2
♣
4
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
4
♣
5
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
5
♣
♣
7
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
7
♣
10
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
♣
10
♣
Figure 2.1Sorting a hand of cards using insertion sort.
reading  our  algorithms.   What  separates  pseudocode  from  “real”  code is that  in
pseudocode, we employ whatever expressive method is most clear and concise to
specify a given algorithm.  Sometimes, the clearest method is English, so do not
be surprised if you come across an English phrase or sentence embedded within
a section of “real” code.  Another difference  between pseudocode  and real code
is that pseudocode is not typically concerned with issues of software engineering.
Issues of data abstraction, modularity, and error handling are often ignored in order
to convey the essence of the algorithm more concisely.
We start withinsertion sort, which is an efficient algorithm for sorting a small
number  of  elements.   Insertion  sort  works  the  way  many  people  sort  a  hand  of
playing cards.  We start with an empty left hand and the cards face down on the
table.   We  then  remove  one  card  at  a  time  from  the  table  and  insert  it  into  the
correct position in the left hand. To find the correct position for a card, we compare
it with each of the cards already  in the hand,  from right to left,  as illustrated  in
Figure 2.1.  At all times, the cards held in the left hand are sorted, and these cards
were originally the top cards of the pile on the table.
We present our pseudocode for insertion sort as a procedure called I
NSERTION-
S
ORT,  which  takes  as  a  parameter  an  arrayAŒ1 : : ncontaining  a  sequence  of
lengthnthat is to be sorted. (In the code, the numbernof elements inAis denoted
byA:length.)  The algorithm sorts the input numbersin place:  it rearranges the
numbers within the arrayA, with at most a constant number of them stored outside
the array at any time. The input arrayAcontains the sorted output sequence when
the I
NSERTION-SORTprocedure is finished.

18Chapter 2Getting Started
123456
524613(a)
123456
254613(b)
123456
245613(c)
123456
245613(d)
123456
245613(e)
123456
245613(f)
Figure 2.2The operation of INSERTION-SORTon the arrayADh5; 2; 4; 6; 1; 3i.  Array indices
appear above the rectangles, and values stored in the array positions appear within the rectangles.
(a)–(e)The iterations of theforloop of lines 1–8.  In each iteration, the black rectangle holds the
key taken fromAŒj , which is compared with the values in shaded rectangles to its left in the test of
line 5. Shaded arrows show array values moved one position to the right in line 6, and black arrows
indicate where the key moves to in line 8.(f)The final sorted array.
INSERTION-SORT.A/
1forjD2toA:length
2keyDAŒj 
3//InsertAŒj into the sorted sequenceAŒ1 : : j1.
4iDj1
5whilei>0andAŒi  >key
6AŒiC1DAŒi 
7iDi1
8AŒiC1Dkey
Loop invariants and the correctness of insertion sort
Figure 2.2 shows how this algorithm  works forADh5; 2; 4; 6; 1; 3i.Thein-
dexjindicates the “current card” being inserted into the hand.  At the beginning
of each iteration of theforloop, which is indexed byj, the subarray consisting
of elementsAŒ1 : : j1constitutes the currently sorted hand, and the remaining
subarrayAŒjC1::ncorresponds to the pile of cards still on the table.  In fact,
elementsAŒ1 : : j1are the elementsoriginallyin positions 1 throughj1,but
now in sorted order.  We state these properties ofAŒ1 : : j1formally as aloop
invariant:
At  the  start  of  each  iteration  of  theforloop  of  lines  1–8,  the  subarray
AŒ1 : : j
1consists of the elements originally inAŒ1 : : j1, but in sorted
order.
We use loop invariants to help us understand why an algorithm is correct.  We
must show three things about a loop invariant:

2.1Insertion sort19
Initialization:It is true prior to the first iteration of the loop.
Maintenance:If it is true before an iteration of the loop, it remains true before the
next iteration.
Termination:When the loop terminates, the invariant gives us a useful property
that helps show that the algorithm is correct.
When the first two properties hold, the loop invariant is true prior to every iteration
of the loop.  (Of course,  we are free to use established  facts other than the loop
invariant itself to prove that the loop invariant remains true before each iteration.)
Note the similarity to mathematical induction, where to prove that a property holds,
you prove a base case and an inductive step. Here, showing that the invariant holds
before the first iteration corresponds to the base case, and showing that the invariant
holds from iteration to iteration corresponds to the inductive step.
The third property is perhaps the most important one, since we are using the loop
invariant to show correctness.  Typically, we use the loop invariant along with the
condition that caused the loop to terminate.  The termination property differs from
how we usually use mathematical induction, in which we apply the inductive step
infinitely; here, we stop the “induction” when the loop terminates.
Let us see how these properties hold for insertion sort.
Initialization:We start by showing that the loop invariant holds before the first
loop iteration,  whenjD2.
1
The subarrayAŒ1 : : j1, therefore,  consists
of just the single elementAŒ1, which is in fact the original element inAŒ1.
Moreover,  this  subarray  is sorted  (trivially,  of course),  which shows that the
loop invariant holds prior to the first iteration of the loop.
Maintenance:Next, we tackle the second property:  showing that each iteration
maintains  the loop  invariant.   Informally,  the body  of  theforloop works  by
movingAŒj1,AŒj2,AŒj3, and so on by one position to the right
until it finds the proper position forAŒj (lines 4–7), at which point it inserts
the value ofAŒj (line 8). The subarrayAŒ1 : : j then consists of the elements
originally inAŒ1 : : j , but in sorted order. Incrementingjfor the next iteration
of theforloop then preserves the loop invariant.
A more formal treatment of the second property would require us to state and
show a loop invariant for thewhileloop of lines 5–7.  At this point, however,
1
When the loop is aforloop, the moment at which we check the loop invariant just prior to the first
iteration is immediately after the initial assignment to the loop-counter variable and just before the
first test in the loop header.  In the case of I
NSERTION-SORT, this time is after assigning2to the
variablejbut before the first test of whetherjA:length.

20Chapter 2Getting Started
we prefer not to get bogged down in such formalism,  and so we rely on our
informal analysis to show that the second property holds for the outer loop.
Termination:Finally, we examine what happens when the loop terminates.  The
condition causing theforloop to terminate is thatj>A:lengthDn. Because
each loop iteration increasesjby1,wemusthavejDnC1at that time.
SubstitutingnC1forjin  the  wording  of  loop  invariant,  we  have  that  the
subarrayAŒ1 : : nconsists of the elements originally inAŒ1 : : n, but in sorted
order. Observing that the subarrayAŒ1 : : nis the entire array, we conclude that
the entire array is sorted. Hence, the algorithm is correct.
We  shall  use  this  method  of  loop  invariants  to  show  correctness  later  in  this
chapter and in other chapters as well.
Pseudocode conventions
We use the following conventions in our pseudocode.

Indentation indicates block structure. For example, the body of theforloop that
begins on line 1 consists of lines 2–8, and the body of thewhileloop that begins
on line  5 contains  lines  6–7  but  not  line 8.   Our  indentation  style  applies  to
if-elsestatements
2
as well. Using indentation instead of conventional indicators
of block structure,  such asbeginandendstatements,  greatly reduces clutter
while preserving, or even enhancing, clarity.
3

The looping constructswhile,for,andrepeat-untiland theif-elseconditional
construct  have  interpretations  similar  to  those  in  C,  C++,  Java,  Python,  and
Pascal.
4
In this book, the loop counter retains its value after exiting the loop,
unlike some situations that arise in C++, Java, and Pascal.  Thus, immediately
after aforloop, the loop counter’s value is the value that first exceeded thefor
loop bound.  We used this property in our correctness argument  for insertion
sort.   Theforloop header in line 1 isforjD2toA:length,  and so when
this loop terminates,jDA:lengthC1(or, equivalently,jDnC1,since
nDA:length).  We use the keywordtowhen aforloop increments  its loop
2
In anif-elsestatement, we indentelseat the same level as its matchingif.  Although we omit the
keywordthen, we occasionally refer to the portion executed when the test followingifis true as a
then clause. For multiway tests, we useelseiffor tests after the first one.
3
Each pseudocode procedure in this book appears on one page so that you will not have to discern
levels of indentation in code that is split across pages.
4
Most block-structured languages have equivalent constructs,  though the exact syntax may differ.
Python lacksrepeat-untilloops, and itsforloops operate a little differently from theforloops in
this book.

2.1Insertion sort21
counter  in  each  iteration,  and  we use  the  keyworddowntowhen  aforloop
decrements  its  loop  counter.   When  the  loop  counter  changes  by  an  amount
greater than1, the amount of change follows the optional keywordby.

The symbol “//” indicates that the remainder of the line is a comment.

A multiple assignment of the formiDjDeassigns to both variablesiandj
the value of expressione; it should be treated as equivalent to the assignment
jDefollowed by the assignmentiDj.

Variables (such asi,j,andkey) are local to the given procedure.  We shall not
use global variables without explicit indication.

We  access  array  elements  by  specifying  the  array  name  followed  by  the  in-
dex  in  square  brackets.   For  example,AŒi indicates  theith  element  of  the
arrayA.  The notation “::” is used to indicate a range of values within an ar-
ray.  Thus,AŒ1 : : j indicates the subarray ofAconsisting of thejelements
AŒ1;AŒ2;:::;AŒj.

We  typically  organize  compound  data  intoobjects,  which  are  composed  of
attributes.   We  access  a  particular  attribute  using  the  syntax  found  in  many
object-oriented  programming languages:  the object name, followed by a dot,
followed by the attribute  name.   For example,  we treat an array as an object
with the attributelengthindicating how many elements it contains.  To specify
the number of elements in an arrayA, we writeA:length.
We treat a variable representing an array or object as a pointer to the data rep-
resenting the array or object. For all attributesfof an objectx, settingyDx
causesy:fto equalx:f. Moreover, if we now setx:fD3, then afterward not
only doesx:fequal3,buty:fequals3as well.  In other words,xandypoint
to the same object after the assignmentyDx.
Our attribute notation can “cascade.” For example, suppose that the attributef
is itself a pointer to some type of object that has an attributeg. Then the notation
x:f:gis implicitly parenthesized as.x:f/:g. In other words, if we had assigned
yDx:f,thenx:f:gis the same asy:g.
Sometimes, a pointer will refer to no object at all.  In this case, we give it the
special value
NIL.

We pass parameters to a procedureby value:  the called procedure receives its
own copy of the parameters, and if it assigns a value to a parameter, the change
isnotseen by the calling procedure.  When objects are passed, the pointer to
the data representing the object is copied, but the object’s attributes are not. For
example, ifxis a parameter of a called procedure, the assignmentxDywithin
the called  procedure  is not  visible  to the calling  procedure.   The assignment
x:fD3, however, is visible.  Similarly, arrays are passed by pointer, so that

22Chapter 2Getting Started
a  pointer  to  the  array  is  passed,  rather  than  the  entire  array,  and  changes  to
individual array elements are visible to the calling procedure.

Areturnstatement immediately transfers control back to the point of call in
the calling procedure. Mostreturnstatements also take a value to pass back to
the caller.  Our pseudocode differs from many programming languages in that
we allow multiple values to be returned in a singlereturnstatement.

The boolean operators “and” and “or” areshort circuiting.  That is, when we
evaluate the expression “xandy”wefirstevaluatex.Ifxevaluates to
FALSE,
then the entire expression cannot evaluate to
TRUE, and so we do not evaluatey.
If, on the other hand,xevaluates to
TRUE,wemustevaluateyto determine the
value of the entire expression.  Similarly, in the expression “xory”weeval-
uate the expressionyonly ifxevaluates to
FALSE.  Short-circuiting operators
allow us to write boolean expressions such as “x¤
NILandx:fDy” without
worrying about what happens when we try to evaluatex:fwhenxis
NIL.

The keyworderrorindicates  that  an error  occurred  because  conditions  were
wrong for the procedure to have been called.  The calling procedure is respon-
sible for handling the error, and so we do not specify what action to take.
Exercises
2.1-1
Using Figure 2.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of I
NSERTION-SORTon the
arrayADh31; 41; 59; 26; 41; 58i.
2.1-2
Rewrite the I
NSERTION-SORTprocedure to sort into nonincreasing instead of non-
decreasing order.
2.1-3
Consider thesearching problem:
Input:A sequence ofnnumbersADha
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
iand a value.
Output:An indexisuch thatDAŒi or  the special  value
NILifdoes not
appear inA.
Write pseudocode forlinear search, which scans through the sequence,  looking
for. Using a loop invariant, prove that your algorithm is correct.  Make sure that
your loop invariant fulfills the three necessary properties.
2.1-4
Consider the problem of adding twon-bit binary integers, stored in twon-element
arraysAandB.  The sum of the two integers should be stored in binary form in

2.2Analyzing algorithms23
an.nC1/-element arrayC. State the problem formally and write pseudocode for
adding the two integers.
2.2  Analyzing algorithms
Analyzingan algorithm has come to mean predicting the resources that the algo-
rithm  requires.   Occasionally,  resources  such  as  memory,  communication  band-
width, or computer hardware are of primary concern, but most often it is compu-
tational time that we want to measure.  Generally, by analyzing several candidate
algorithms for a problem, we can identify a most efficient one. Such analysis may
indicate more than one viable candidate, but we can often discard several inferior
algorithms in the process.
Before we can analyze an algorithm, we must have a model of the implemen-
tation  technology  that  we  will  use,  including  a  model  for  the  resources  of  that
technology and their costs.  For most of this book, we shall assume a generic one-
processor,random-access machine (RAM)model of computation  as our imple-
mentation technology and understand that our algorithms will be implemented as
computer programs.  In the RAM model,  instructions  are executed one after an-
other, with no concurrent operations.
Strictly speaking, we should precisely define the instructions of the RAM model
and their costs.  To do so, however, would be tedious and would yield little insight
into algorithm design and analysis.  Yet we must be careful not to abuse the RAM
model. For example, what if a RAM had an instruction that sorts? Then we could
sort in just one instruction. Such a RAM would be unrealistic, since real computers
do not have such instructions.  Our guide, therefore, is how real computers are de-
signed. The RAM model contains instructions commonly found in real computers:
arithmetic (such as add, subtract, multiply, divide, remainder, floor, ceiling), data
movement (load, store, copy), and control (conditional and unconditional branch,
subroutine call and return). Each such instruction takes a constant amount of time.
The data types in the RAM model are integer and floating point (for storing real
numbers).  Although we typically do not concern ourselves with precision in this
book, in some applications precision is crucial. We also assume a limit on the size
of each word of data.  For example, when working with inputs of sizen, we typ-
ically assume that integers are represented byclgnbits for some constantc1.
We requirec1so that each word can hold the value ofn, enabling us to index the
individual input elements, and we restrictcto be a constant so that the word size
does not grow arbitrarily.  (If the word size could grow arbitrarily, we could store
huge amounts of data in one word and operate on it all in constant time—clearly
an unrealistic scenario.)

24Chapter 2Getting Started
Real computers contain instructions not listed above, and such instructions rep-
resent a gray area in the RAM model.  For example, is exponentiation a constant-
time instruction? In the general case, no; it takes several instructions to computex
y
whenxandyare real numbers. In restricted situations, however, exponentiation is
a constant-time operation.  Many computers have a “shift left” instruction, which
in constant  time shifts  the bits of an integer  bykpositions  to the left.   In most
computers, shifting the bits of an integer by one position to the left is equivalent
to multiplication by 2, so that shifting the bits bykpositions to the left is equiv-
alent to multiplication by2
k
.  Therefore, such computers can compute2
k
in one
constant-time instruction by shifting the integer 1 bykpositions to the left, as long
askis no more than the number of bits in a computer word.  We will endeavor to
avoid such gray areas in the RAM model, but we will treat computation of2
k
as a
constant-time operation whenkis a small enough positive integer.
In the RAM model, we do not attempt to model the memory hierarchy that is
common in contemporary computers.  That is, we do not model caches or virtual
memory.  Several computational models attempt to account for memory-hierarchy
effects,  which  are  sometimes  significant  in  real  programs  on  real  machines.   A
handful of problems in this book examine memory-hierarchy  effects,  but for the
most part, the analyses in this book will not consider them.  Models that include
the memory hierarchy are quite a bit more complex than the RAM model, and so
they can be difficult  to work with.  Moreover,  RAM-model analyses  are usually
excellent predictors of performance on actual machines.
Analyzing even a simple algorithm in the RAM model can be a challenge.  The
mathematical tools required may include combinatorics,  probability theory, alge-
braic dexterity, and the ability to identify the most significant terms in a formula.
Because the behavior of an algorithm may be different for each possible input, we
need a means for summarizing that behavior in simple, easily understood formulas.
Even though we typically select only one machine model to analyze a given al-
gorithm, we still face many choices in deciding how to express our analysis.  We
would like a way that is simple to write and manipulate, shows the important char-
acteristics of an algorithm’s resource requirements, and suppresses tedious details.
Analysis of insertion sort
The time taken by the I
NSERTION-SORTprocedure depends on the input: sorting a
thousand numbers takes longer than sorting three numbers. Moreover, I
NSERTION-
S
ORTcan take different amounts of time to sort two input sequences of the same
size depending on how nearly sorted they already are.  In general, the time taken
by an algorithm grows with the size of the input, so it is traditional to describe the
running time of a program as a function of the size of its input. To do so, we need
to define the terms “running time” and “size of input” more carefully.

2.2Analyzing algorithms25
The best notion forinput sizedepends on the problem being studied.  For many
problems, such as sorting or computing discrete Fourier transforms, the most nat-
ural measure is thenumber of items in the input—for example,  the array sizen
for sorting.  For many other problems, such as multiplying two integers, the best
measure of input size is thetotal number of bitsneeded to represent the input in
ordinary binary notation. Sometimes, it is more appropriate to describe the size of
the input with two numbers rather than one.  For instance, if the input to an algo-
rithm is a graph,  the input size can be described by the numbers of vertices and
edges in the graph.  We shall indicate which input size measure is being used with
each problem we study.
Therunning timeof an algorithm on a particular input is the number of primitive
operations  or  “steps”  executed.   It  is  convenient  to  define  the  notion  of  step  so
that it is as machine-independent  as possible.   For the moment,  let us adopt  the
following view.  A constant amount of time is required to execute each line of our
pseudocode.  One line may take a different amount of time than another line, but
we shall  assume that  each execution  of theith line takes  timec
i
,wherec
i
is a
constant.  This viewpoint is in keeping with the RAM model, and it also reflects
how the pseudocode would be implemented on most actual computers.
5
In the following discussion, our expression for the running time of INSERTION-
S
ORTwill evolve from a messy formula that uses all the statement costsc
i
to a
much simpler  notation  that  is more concise  and  more  easily  manipulated.   This
simpler notation will also make it easy to determine whether one algorithm is more
efficient than another.
We start  by  presenting  the  I
NSERTION-SORTprocedure  with  the  time  “cost”
of each statement and the number of times each statement is executed.  For each
jD2;3;:::;n,wherenDA:length,welett
j
denote the number of times the
whileloop test in line 5 is executed for that value ofj.Whenafororwhileloop
exits in the usual way (i.e., due to the test in the loop header), the test is executed
one time more than the loop body.  We assume that comments are not executable
statements, and so they take no time.
5
There are some subtleties here.  Computational steps that we specify in English are often variants
of a procedure that requires more than just a constant amount of time.  For example,  later in this
book  we  might  say “sort  the  points  byx-coordinate,”  which,  as  we  shall  see,  takes  more  than a
constant  amount  of  time.   Also,  note  that a statement  that calls a subroutine  takes  constant  time,
though the subroutine, once invoked, may take more. That is, we separate the process ofcallingthe
subroutine—passing parameters to it, etc.—from the process ofexecutingthe subroutine.

26Chapter 2Getting Started
INSERTION-SORT.A/costtimes
1forjD2toA:lengthc
1
n
2keyDAŒj c
2
n1
3//InsertAŒj into the sorted
sequenceAŒ1 : : j1.0n1
4iDj1c
4
n1
5whilei>0andAŒi  >keyc
5
P
n
jD2
t
j
6AŒiC1DAŒi c
6
P
n
jD2
.t
j
1/
7iDi1c
7
P
n
jD2
.t
j
1/
8AŒiC1Dkeyc
8
n1
The running time of the algorithm is the sum of running times for each state-
ment executed; a statement that takesc
i
steps to execute and executesntimes will
contributec
i
nto the total running time.
6
To computeT .n/, the running time of
I
NSERTION-SORTon an input ofnvalues,  we sum the products of thecostand
timescolumns, obtaining
T .n/Dc
1
nCc
2
.n1/Cc
4
.n1/Cc
5
n
X
jD2
t
j
Cc
6
n
X
jD2
.t
j
1/
Cc
7
n
X
jD2
.t
j
1/Cc
8
.n1/ :
Even  for  inputs  of  a given  size,  an  algorithm’s  running  time  may  depend  on
whichinput  of  that  size  is  given.   For  example,  in  I
NSERTION-SORT,  the  best
case occurs if the array is already sorted.  For eachjD2;3;:::;n, we then find
thatAŒi keyin line 5 whenihas its initial value ofj1.  Thust
j
D1for
jD2;3;:::;n, and the best-case running time is
T .n/Dc
1
nCc
2
.n1/Cc
4
.n1/Cc
5
.n1/Cc
8
.n1/
D.c
1
Cc
2
Cc
4
Cc
5
Cc
8
/n.c
2
Cc
4
Cc
5
Cc
8
/:
We can express this running time asanCbforconstantsaandbthat depend on
the statement costsc
i
;itisthusalinear functionofn.
If the array is in reverse sorted order—that is, in decreasing order—the worst
case results.  We must compare each elementAŒj with each element in the entire
sorted subarrayAŒ1 : : j1,andsot
j
DjforjD2;3;:::;n. Noting that
6
This  characteristic  does  not  necessarily  hold  for  a  resource  such  as  memory.   A  statement  that
referencesmwords of memory and is executedntimes does not necessarily referencemndistinct
words of memory.

2.2Analyzing algorithms27
n
X
jD2
jD
n.nC1/
2
1
and
n
X
jD2
.j1/D
n.n1/
2
(see Appendix A for a review of how to solve these summations), we find that in
the worst case, the running time of I
NSERTION-SORTis
T .n/Dc
1
nCc
2
.n1/Cc
4
.n1/Cc
5

n.nC1/
2
1

Cc
6

n.n1/
2

Cc
7

n.n1/
2

Cc
8
.n1/
D

c
5
2
C
c
6
2
C
c
7
2

n
2
C

c
1
Cc
2
Cc
4
C
c
5
2

c
6
2

c
7
2
Cc
8

n
.c
2
Cc
4
Cc
5
Cc
8
/:
We can express this worst-case running time asan
2
CbnCcfor constantsa,b,
andcthat again depend on the statement costsc
i
; it is thus aquadratic function
ofn.
Typically,  as in insertion  sort,  the running  time of an algorithm  is fixed for a
given input, although in later chapters we shall see some interesting “randomized”
algorithms whose behavior can vary even for a fixed input.
Worst-case and average-case analysis
In our analysis of insertion sort, we looked at both the best case, in which the input
array was already sorted, and the worst case, in which the input array was reverse
sorted.  For the remainder  of this book,  though,  we shall usually concentrate  on
finding only theworst-case running time, that is, the longest running time forany
input of sizen. We give three reasons for this orientation.

The worst-case running time of an algorithm gives us an upper bound on the
running time for any input. Knowing it provides a guarantee that the algorithm
will never take any longer.  We need not make some educated guess about the
running time and hope that it never gets much worse.

For some algorithms, the worst case occurs fairly often. For example, in search-
ing a database for a particular piece of information, the searching algorithm’s
worst case will often occur when the information is not present in the database.
In some applications, searches for absent information may be frequent.

28Chapter 2Getting Started

The “average case” is often roughly as bad as the worst case.  Suppose that we
randomly choosennumbers and apply insertion sort. How long does it take to
determine where in subarrayAŒ1 : : j1to insert elementAŒj ?Onaverage,
half the elements inAŒ1 : : j1are less thanAŒj , and half the elements are
greater. On average, therefore, we check half of the subarrayAŒ1 : : j1,and
sot
j
is aboutj=2.  The resulting average-case running time turns out to be a
quadratic function of the input size, just like the worst-case running time.
In some particular cases, we shall be interested in theaverage-caserunning time
of  an algorithm;  we shall  see the  technique  ofprobabilistic analysisapplied  to
various  algorithms  throughout  this book.   The scope  of average-case  analysis  is
limited,  because  it may not  be apparent  what  constitutes  an “average”  input  for
a particular  problem.   Often,  we shall  assume that  all inputs  of a given size are
equally likely. In practice, this assumption may be violated, but we can sometimes
use arandomized algorithm, which makes random choices, to allow a probabilistic
analysis and yield anexpectedrunning time.  We explore randomized algorithms
more in Chapter 5 and in several other subsequent chapters.
Order of growth
We used  some simplifying  abstractions  to ease  our  analysis  of  the  I
NSERTION-
S
ORTprocedure.   First,  we ignored  the actual  cost  of each  statement,  using  the
constantsc
i
to represent these costs.  Then, we observed that even these constants
give us more detail than we really need: we expressed the worst-case running time
asan
2
CbnCcfor  some constantsa,b,andcthat  depend  on  the  statement
costsc
i
. We thus ignored not only the actual statement costs, but also the abstract
costsc
i
.
We shall now make one more simplifying abstraction:  it is therate of growth,
ororder of growth, of the running time that really interests us.  We therefore con-
sider only the leading term of a formula (e.g.,an
2
), since the lower-order terms are
relatively insignificant for large values ofn. We also ignore the leading term’s con-
stant coefficient, since constant factors are less significant than the rate of growth
in determining computational efficiency for large inputs.  For insertion sort, when
we ignore the lower-order terms and the leading term’s constant coefficient, we are
left with the factor ofn
2
from the leading term.  We write that insertion sort has a
worst-case running time of‚.n
2
/(pronounced “theta ofn-squared”). We shall use
‚-notation informally in this chapter, and we will define it precisely in Chapter 3.
We usually consider one algorithm to be more efficient than another if its worst-
case running time has a lower order of growth. Due to constant factors and lower-
order terms, an algorithm whose running time has a higher order of growth might
take less time for small inputs than an algorithm whose running time has a lower

2.3Designing algorithms29
order of growth. But for large enough inputs, a‚.n
2
/algorithm, for example, will
run more quickly in the worst case than a‚.n
3
/algorithm.
Exercises
2.2-1
Express the functionn
3
=1000100n
2
100nC3in terms of‚-notation.
2.2-2
Consider sortingnnumbers stored in arrayAby first finding the smallest element
ofAand exchanging it with the element inAŒ1.  Then find the second smallest
element ofA, and exchange it withAŒ2. Continue in this manner for the firstn1
elements ofA.  Write pseudocode for this algorithm, which is known asselection
sort.  What loop invariant does this algorithm maintain?  Why does it need to run
for only the firstn1elements, rather than for allnelements? Give the best-case
and worst-case running times of selection sort in‚-notation.
2.2-3
Consider linear search again (see Exercise 2.1-3).  How many elements of the in-
put sequence need to be checked on the average, assuming that the element being
searched for is equally likely to be any element in the array?  How about in the
worst  case?   What  are  the  average-case  and  worst-case  running  times  of  linear
search in‚-notation? Justify your answers.
2.2-4
How can we modify almost any algorithm to have a good best-case running time?
2.3  Designing algorithms
We can choose from a wide range of algorithm design techniques.  For insertion
sort, we used anincrementalapproach:  having sorted the subarrayAŒ1 : : j1,
we  inserted  the  single  elementAŒj into  its  proper  place,  yielding  the  sorted
subarrayAŒ1 : : j .
In this section, we examine an alternative design approach,  known as “divide-
and-conquer,” which we shall explore in more detail in Chapter 4. We’ll use divide-
and-conquer to design a sorting algorithm whose worst-case running time is much
less than that of insertion sort. One advantage of divide-and-conquer algorithms is
that their running times are often easily determined using techniques that we will
see in Chapter 4.

30Chapter 2Getting Started
2.3.1  The divide-and-conquer approach
Many useful algorithms arerecursivein structure:  to solve a given problem, they
call  themselves  recursively  one  or  more  times  to  deal  with  closely  related  sub-
problems. These algorithms typically follow adivide-and-conquerapproach: they
break the problem into several subproblems that are similar to the original prob-
lem but smaller in size, solve the subproblems recursively, and then combine these
solutions to create a solution to the original problem.
The divide-and-conquer paradigm involves three steps at each level of the recur-
sion:
Dividethe problem into a number of subproblems that are smaller instances of the
same problem.
Conquerthe subproblems by solving them recursively. If the subproblem sizes are
small enough, however, just solve the subproblems in a straightforward manner.
Combinethe solutions to the subproblems into the solution for the original prob-
lem.
Themerge sortalgorithm closely follows the divide-and-conquer paradigm. In-
tuitively, it operates as follows.
Divide:Divide then-element sequence to be sorted into two subsequences ofn=2
elements each.
Conquer:Sort the two subsequences recursively using merge sort.
Combine:Merge the two sorted subsequences to produce the sorted answer.
The recursion “bottoms out” when the sequence to be sorted has length 1, in which
case there is no work to be done,  since every sequence of length 1 is already in
sorted order.
The  key  operation  of  the  merge  sort  algorithm  is  the  merging  of  two  sorted
sequences  in  the  “combine”  step.   We  merge  by  calling  an  auxiliary  procedure
M
ERGE.A;p;q;r/,whereAis an array andp,q,andrare indices into the array
such thatpq<r.  The procedure  assumes that the subarraysAŒp : : qand
AŒqC1::rare in sorted order.  Itmergesthem to form a single sorted subarray
that replaces the current subarrayAŒp : : r .
Our  M
ERGEprocedure  takes  time‚.n/,wherenDrpC1is  the  total
number of elements being merged, and it works as follows. Returning to our card-
playing motif, suppose we have two piles of cards face up on a table.  Each pile is
sorted, with the smallest cards on top. We wish to merge the two piles into a single
sorted output pile, which is to be face down on the table.  Our basic step consists
of choosing the smaller of the two cards on top of the face-up piles, removing it
from its pile (which exposes a new top card), and placing this card face down onto

2.3Designing algorithms31
the output  pile.  We repeat this step until one input pile is empty,  at which time
we just take the remaining input pile and place it face down onto the output pile.
Computationally, each basic step takes constant time, since we are comparing just
the two top cards.  Since we perform at mostnbasic steps,  merging takes‚.n/
time.
The following  pseudocode  implements the above idea,  but  with an additional
twist that avoids having to check whether either pile is empty in each basic step.
We place on the bottom of each pile asentinelcard, which contains a special value
that we use to simplify our code.  Here, we use1as the sentinel value,  so that
whenever a card with1is exposed, it cannot be the smaller card unless both piles
have their sentinel cards exposed. But once that happens, all the nonsentinel cards
have  already  been  placed  onto  the  output  pile.   Since  we know  in  advance  that
exactlyrpC1cards will be placed onto the output pile, we can stop once we
have performed that many basic steps.
M
ERGE.A;p;q;r/
1n
1
DqpC1
2n
2
Drq
3letLŒ1::n
1
C1andRŒ1 : : n
2
C1be new arrays
4foriD1ton
1
5LŒi DAŒpCi1
6forjD1ton
2
7RŒj DAŒqCj
8LŒn
1
C1D1
9RŒn
2
C1D1
10iD1
11jD1
12forkDptor
13ifLŒi RŒj 
14AŒkDLŒi 
15iDiC1
16elseAŒkDRŒj 
17jDjC1
In detail, the M
ERGEprocedure works as follows. Line 1 computes the lengthn
1
of  the  subarrayAŒp : : q,  and  line  2  computes  the  lengthn
2
of  the  subarray
AŒqC1::r.  We create arraysLandR(“left” and “right”),  of lengthsn
1
C1
andn
2
C1, respectively,  in line 3; the extra position in each array will hold the
sentinel.  Theforloop of lines 4–5 copies the subarrayAŒp : : qintoLŒ1::n
1
,
and  theforloop  of  lines  6–7  copies  the  subarrayAŒqC1::rintoRŒ1::n
2
.
Lines 8–9 put the sentinels at the ends of the arraysLandR.  Lines 10–17, illus-

32Chapter 2Getting Started
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(a)
24571236
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(b)
2457
1
2361
245712364571236
A
LR
9 10111213141516
12341234
ij
k
(c)
2457
1
2361
5712362
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(d)
2457
1
2361
7123622
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
9 10111213141516
9 10111213141516
9 101112131415168
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
Figure 2.3The  operation  of  lines  10–17  in  the  call  MERGE.A; 9; 12; 16/,  when  the  subarray
AŒ9 : : 16contains the sequenceh2; 4; 5; 7; 1; 2; 3; 6i.  After copying and inserting sentinels,  the
arrayLcontainsh2; 4; 5; 7;1i, and the arrayRcontainsh1; 2; 3; 6;1i.  Lightly shaded positions
inAcontain their final values, and lightly shaded positions inLandRcontain values that have yet
to be copied back intoA.  Taken together, the lightly shaded positions always comprise the values
originally inAŒ9 : : 16, along with the two sentinels.  Heavily shaded positions inAcontain values
that will be copied over, and heavily shaded positions inLandRcontain values that have already
been copied back intoA.(a)–(h)The arraysA,L,andR, and their respective indicesk,i,andj
prior to each iteration of the loop of lines 12–17.
trated in Figure 2.3, perform therpC1basic steps by maintaining the following
loop invariant:
At the start  of each iteration  of theforloop of lines 12–17,  the subarray
AŒp : : k1contains thekpsmallest elements ofLŒ1::n
1
C1and
RŒ1 : : n
2
C1, in sorted order.  Moreover,LŒi andRŒj are the smallest
elements of their arrays that have not been copied back intoA.
We must show that this loop invariant holds prior to the first iteration of thefor
loop  of  lines  12–17,  that  each  iteration  of  the loop  maintains  the  invariant,  and
that  the  invariant  provides  a useful  property  to  show  correctness  when  the loop
terminates.
Initialization:Prior to the first iteration of the loop, we havekDp, so that the
subarrayAŒp : : k1is empty.  This empty subarray contains thekpD0
smallest elements ofLandR, and sinceiDjD1, bothLŒi andRŒj are the
smallest elements of their arrays that have not been copied back intoA.

2.3Designing algorithms33
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(e)
2457
1
2361
1236223A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(f)
2457
1
2361
2362234
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(g)
2457
1
2361
3622345
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(h)
2457
1
2361
622345
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
5
∞
6
A
LR
12341234
ij
k
(i)
2457
1
2361
722345
5
∞
5
∞
6
9 10111213141516
9 10111213141516
9 10111213141516
9 10111213141516
9 10111213141516
8
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
8
...
17
...
Figure 2.3, continued  (i)The  arrays and  indices  at termination.   At this point,  the  subarray in
AŒ9 : : 16is sorted, and the two sentinels inLandRare the only two elements in these arrays that
have not been copied intoA.
Maintenance:To see that each iteration maintains the loop invariant, let us first
suppose thatLŒi RŒj .ThenLŒi is the smallest element not yet copied
back intoA. BecauseAŒp : : k1contains thekpsmallest elements, after
line 14 copiesLŒi intoAŒk, the subarrayAŒp : : kwill contain thekpC1
smallest elements.  Incrementingk(in theforloop update) andi(in line 15)
reestablishes the loop invariant for the next iteration.  If insteadLŒi  > RŒj ,
then lines 16–17 perform the appropriate action to maintain the loop invariant.
Termination:At termination,kDrC1.   By the loop invariant,  the subarray
AŒp : : k1,whichisAŒp : : r , contains  thekpDrpC1smallest
elements ofLŒ1::n
1
C1andRŒ1::n
2
C1, in sorted order.  The arraysL
andRtogether containn
1
Cn
2
C2DrpC3elements.  All but the two
largest  have been copied back intoA, and these two largest elements are the
sentinels.

34Chapter 2Getting Started
To  see  that  the  MERGEprocedure  runs  in‚.n/time,  wherenDrpC1,
observe  that  each  of  lines  1–3  and  8–11  takes  constant  time,  theforloops  of
lines  4–7 take‚.n
1
Cn
2
/D‚.n/time,
7
and there areniterations  of  thefor
loop of lines 12–17, each of which takes constant time.
We can now  use  the  M
ERGEprocedure  as a subroutine  in the  merge  sort  al-
gorithm.  The procedure  M
ERGE-SORT.A;p;r/sorts the elements in the subar-
rayAŒp : : r .Ifpr,  the subarray  has  at  most one  element  and is therefore
already sorted.  Otherwise,  the divide step simply computes an indexqthat par-
titionsAŒp : : r into  two  subarrays:AŒp : : q,  containing
d
n=2
e
elements,  and
AŒqC1::r, containing
b
n=2
c
elements.
8
MERGE-SORT.A;p;r/
1ifp<r
2qD
b
.pCr/=2
c
3M
ERGE-SORT.A;p;q/
4M
ERGE-SORT.A; qC1; r /
5M
ERGE.A;p;q;r/
To sort the entire sequenceADhAŒ1; AŒ2; : : : ; AŒni, we make the initial call
M
ERGE-SORT.A;1;A:length/,  where once againA:lengthDn.   Figure 2.4 il-
lustrates the operation of the procedure bottom-up whennisapowerof2.The
algorithm consists of merging pairs of 1-item sequences to form sorted sequences
of length 2, merging pairs of sequences of length 2 to form sorted sequences of
length 4, and so on, until two sequences of lengthn=2are merged to form the final
sorted sequence of lengthn.
2.3.2  Analyzing divide-and-conquer algorithms
When  an  algorithm  contains  a recursive  call  to  itself,  we can  often  describe  its
running time by arecurrence equationorrecurrence, which describes the overall
running time on a problem of sizenin terms of the running time on smaller inputs.
We can then use mathematical tools to solve the recurrence and provide bounds on
the performance of the algorithm.
7
We shall see in Chapter 3 how to formally interpret equations containing‚-notation.
8
The expression
d
x
e
denotes the least integer greater than or equal tox,and
b
x
c
denotes the greatest
integer less than or equal tox.  These notations are defined in Chapter 3.  The easiest way to verify
that settingqto
b
.pCr/=2
c
yields subarraysAŒp : : qandAŒqC1::rof sizes
d
n=2
e
and
b
n=2
c
,
respectively, is to examine the four cases that arise depending on whether each ofpandris odd or
even.

2.3Designing algorithms35
52471326
25471326
24571236
12234567
merge
merge
merge
sorted sequence
initial sequence
mergemergemergemerge
Figure 2.4The operation of merge sort on the arrayADh5; 2; 4; 7; 1; 3; 2; 6i. The lengths of the
sorted sequences being merged increase as the algorithm progresses from bottom to top.
A recurrence for the running time of a divide-and-conquer  algorithm falls out
from the three steps of the basic paradigm.  As before, we letT .n/be the running
time  on  a  problem  of  sizen.   If  the  problem  size  is  small  enough,  saync
for some constantc, the straightforward  solution  takes constant  time,  which we
write as‚.1/.   Suppose  that  our division  of the problem  yieldsasubproblems,
each of which is1=bthe size of the original.  (For merge sort, bothaandbare2,
but we shall see many divide-and-conquer  algorithms in whicha¤b.)  It takes
timeT .n=b/to solve one subproblem of sizen=b, and so it takes timeaT .n=b/
to solveaof them.  If we takeD.n/time to divide the problem into subproblems
andC.n/time to combine the solutions to the subproblems into the solution to the
original problem, we get the recurrence
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnc;
aT .n=b/CD.n/CC.n/otherwise:
In Chapter 4, we shall see how to solve common recurrences of this form.
Analysis of merge sort
Although the pseudocode for M
ERGE-SORTworks correctly when the number of
elements is not even, our recurrence-based analysis is simplified if we assume that

36Chapter 2Getting Started
the original problem size is a power of2.  Each divide step then yields two subse-
quences of size exactlyn=2.  In Chapter 4, we shall see that this assumption does
not affect the order of growth of the solution to the recurrence.
We reason as follows to set up the recurrence forT .n/, the worst-case running
time of merge sort onnnumbers.  Merge sort on just one element takes constant
time. When we haven>1elements, we break down the running time as follows.
Divide:The divide  step  just  computes  the  middle  of  the  subarray,  which  takes
constant time. Thus,D.n/D‚.1/.
Conquer:We recursively solve two subproblems,  each of sizen=2, which con-
tributes2T .n=2/to the running time.
Combine:We  have  already  noted  that  the  M
ERGEprocedure  on  ann-element
subarray takes time‚.n/,andsoC.n/D‚.n/.
When we add the functionsD.n/andC.n/for the merge sort analysis, we are
adding a function that is‚.n/and a function that is‚.1/.  This sum is a linear
function ofn,thatis,‚.n/.  Adding it to the2T .n=2/term from the “conquer”
step gives the recurrence for the worst-case running timeT .n/of merge sort:
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
2T .n=2/C‚.n/ifn>1:
(2.1)
In  Chapter  4,  we  shall  see  the  “master  theorem,”  which  we  can  use  to  show
thatT .n/is‚.nlgn/, where lgnstands for log
2
n.  Because the logarithm func-
tion grows more slowly than any linear function,  for large enough inputs,  merge
sort,  with its‚.nlgn/running  time,  outperforms  insertion  sort,  whose running
time is‚.n
2
/, in the worst case.
We do not need the master theorem to intuitively understand why the solution to
the recurrence (2.1) isT .n/D‚.nlgn/. Let us rewrite recurrence (2.1) as
T .n/D
(
cifnD1;
2T .n=2/Ccnifn>1;
(2.2)
where the constantcrepresents the time required to solve problems of size1as
well as the time per array element of the divide and combine steps.
9
9
It is unlikely that the same constant exactly represents both the time to solve problems of size1
and the time per array element of the divide and combine steps. We can get around this problem by
lettingcbe the larger of these times and understanding that our recurrence gives an upper bound on
the running time, or by lettingcbe the lesser of these times and understanding that our recurrence
gives a lower bound on the running time. Both bounds are on the order ofnlgnand, taken together,
give a‚.nlgn/running time.

2.3Designing algorithms37
Figure 2.5 shows how we can solve recurrence (2.2).  For convenience, we as-
sume thatnis an exact power of2.  Part (a) of the figure showsT .n/,whichwe
expand in part (b) into an equivalent tree representing the recurrence. Thecnterm
is the root (the cost incurred at the top level of recursion), and the two subtrees of
the root are the two smaller recurrencesT .n=2/. Part (c) shows this process carried
one step further by expandingT .n=2/.  The cost incurred at each of the two sub-
nodes at the second level of recursion iscn=2.  We continue expanding each node
in the tree by breaking it into its constituent parts as determined by the recurrence,
until the problem sizes get down to1, each with a cost ofc.  Part (d) shows the
resultingrecursion tree.
Next,  we add  the  costs  across  each  level  of  the  tree.   The  top  level  has  total
costcn, the next level down has total costc.n=2/Cc.n=2/Dcn, the level after
that has total costc.n=4/Cc.n=4/Cc.n=4/Cc.n=4/Dcn, and so on. In general,
the levelibelow the top has2
i
nodes, each contributing a cost ofc.n=2
i
/,sothat
theith level below the top has total cost2
i
c.n=2
i
/Dcn. The bottom level hasn
nodes, each contributing a cost ofc, for a total cost ofcn.
The total number of levels of the recursion tree in Figure 2.5 is lgnC1,where
nis the number of leaves, corresponding to the input size.  An informal inductive
argument justifies this claim. The base case occurs whennD1, in which case the
tree has only one level.  Since lg1D0,wehavethatlgnC1gives the correct
number of levels. Now assume as an inductive hypothesis that the number of levels
of a recursion tree with2
i
leaves is lg2
i
C1DiC1(since for any value ofi,
we have that lg2
i
Di).  Because we are assuming that the input size is a power
of2,  the  next  input  size  to consider  is2
iC1
.   A  tree  withnD2
iC1
leaves  has
one  more  level  than  a  tree  with2
i
leaves,  and  so  the  total  number  of  levels  is
.iC1/C1Dlg2
iC1
C1.
To compute the total cost represented by the recurrence (2.2), we simply add up
the costs of all the levels.  The recursion tree has lgnC1levels, each costingcn,
for a total cost ofcn.lgnC1/DcnlgnCcn.  Ignoring the low-order term and
the constantcgives the desired result of‚.nlgn/.
Exercises
2.3-1
Using Figure 2.4 as a model,  illustrate  the operation  of merge sort  on the array
ADh3; 41; 52; 26; 38; 57; 9; 49i.
2.3-2
Rewrite the M
ERGEprocedure so that it does not use sentinels,  instead stopping
once either arrayLorRhas had all its elements copied back toAand then copying
the remainder of the other array back intoA.

38Chapter 2Getting Started
cn
cn
...
Total:cn lg n + cn
cn
lgn
cn
n
c
cccccc
...
(d)
(c)
cn
T(n/2)T(n/2)
(b)
T(n)
(a)
cn
cn/2
T(n/4)T(n/4)
cn/2
T(n/4)T(n/4)
cn
cn/2
cn/4cn/4
cn/2
cn/4cn/4
Figure 2.5How  to  construct  a  recursion  tree  for  the  recurrenceT .n/D2T .n=2/Ccn.
Part(a)showsT .n/, which progressively expands in(b)–(d)to form the recursion tree.  The fully
expanded tree in part (d) has lgnC1levels (i.e., it has height lgn, as indicated),  and each level
contributes a total cost ofcn. The total cost, therefore, iscnlgnCcn,whichis‚.nlgn/.

Problems for Chapter 239
2.3-3
Use mathematical induction to show that whennis an exact power of2,thesolu-
tion of the recurrence
T .n/D
(
2ifnD2;
2T .n=2/CnifnD2
k
,fork>1
isT .n/Dnlgn.
2.3-4
We can express insertion sort as a recursive procedure as follows.  In order to sort
AŒ1 : : n, we recursively sortAŒ1 : : n1and then insertAŒninto the sorted array
AŒ1 : : n1.  Write a recurrence for the running time of this recursive version of
insertion sort.
2.3-5
Referring back to the searching problem (see Exercise 2.1-3), observe that if the
sequenceAis sorted,  we can check the midpoint  of the sequence againstand
eliminate half of the sequence from further consideration.  Thebinary searchal-
gorithm  repeats  this procedure,  halving  the size of the remaining  portion  of the
sequence  each  time.   Write  pseudocode,  either  iterative  or  recursive,  for  binary
search. Argue that the worst-case running time of binary search is‚.lgn/.
2.3-6
Observe that  thewhileloop of  lines  5–7 of  the  I
NSERTION-SORTprocedure  in
Section 2.1 uses  a linear  search  to scan (backward)  through  the sorted  subarray
AŒ1 : : j1.  Can we use a binary search (see Exercise 2.3-5) instead to improve
the overall worst-case running time of insertion sort to‚.nlgn/?
2.3-7?
Describe a‚.nlgn/-time algorithm that, given a setSofnintegers and another
integerx, determines whether or not there exist two elements inSwhose sum is
exactlyx.
Problems
2-1  Insertion sort on small arrays in merge sort
Although  merge  sort  runs  in‚.nlgn/worst-case  time  and  insertion  sort  runs
in‚.n
2
/worst-case time, the constant factors in insertion sort can make it faster
in practice for small problem  sizes on many machines.   Thus,  it makes sense to
coarsenthe leaves of the recursion by using insertion sort within merge sort when

40Chapter 2Getting Started
subproblems become sufficiently small.  Consider a modification to merge sort in
whichn=ksublists  of  lengthkare  sorted  using  insertion  sort  and  then  merged
using the standard merging mechanism, wherekis a value to be determined.
a.Show that insertion sort can sort then=ksublists, each of lengthk,in‚.nk/
worst-case time.
b.Show how to merge the sublists in‚.nlg.n=k//worst-case time.
c.Given that the modified algorithm runs in‚.nkCnlg.n=k//worst-case time,
what is the largest value ofkas a function ofnfor which the modified algorithm
has the same running time as standard merge sort, in terms of‚-notation?
d.How should we choosekin practice?
2-2  Correctness of bubblesort
Bubblesort is a popular, but inefficient, sorting algorithm.  It works by repeatedly
swapping adjacent elements that are out of order.
B
UBBLESORT.A/
1foriD1toA:length1
2forjDA:lengthdowntoiC1
3ifAŒj  < AŒj1
4exchangeAŒj withAŒj1
a.LetA
0
denote the output of BUBBLESORT.A/.  To prove that BUBBLESORTis
correct, we need to prove that it terminates and that
A
0
Œ1A
0
Œ2A
0
Œn ;(2.3)
wherenDA:length.  In order to show that B
UBBLESORTactually sorts, what
else do we need to prove?
The next two parts will prove inequality (2.3).
b.State precisely a loop invariant for theforloop in lines 2–4, and prove that this
loop invariant holds.  Your proof should use the structure of the loop invariant
proof presented in this chapter.
c.Using the termination condition of the loop invariant proved in part (b), state
a loop invariant  for theforloop in lines 1–4 that will allow you to prove in-
equality (2.3).  Your proof should use the structure of the loop invariant proof
presented in this chapter.

Problems for Chapter 241
d.What is the worst-case running time of bubblesort? How does it compare to the
running time of insertion sort?
2-3  Correctness of Horner’s rule
The following code fragment implements Horner’s rule for evaluating a polynomial
P.x/D
n
X
kD0
a
k
x
k
Da
0
Cx.a
1
Cx.a
2
CCx.a
n1
Cxa
n
/// ;
given the coefficientsa
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n
and a value forx:
1yD0
2foriDndownto0
3yDa
i
Cxy
a.In  terms  of‚-notation,  what  is  the  running  time  of  this  code  fragment  for
Horner’s rule?
b.Write pseudocode to implement the naive polynomial-evaluation algorithm that
computes each term of the polynomial from scratch.  What is the running time
of this algorithm? How does it compare to Horner’s rule?
c.Consider the following loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of theforloop of lines 2–3,
yD
n.iC1/
X
kD0
a
kCiC1
x
k
:
Interpret a summation with no terms as equaling0.  Following the structure of
the loop invariant proof presented in this chapter, use this loop invariant to show
that, at termination,yD
P
n
kD0
a
k
x
k
.
d.Conclude by arguing that the given code fragment correctly evaluates a poly-
nomial characterized by the coefficientsa
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n
.
2-4  Inversions
LetAŒ1 : : nbe an array ofndistinct numbers. Ifi<jandAŒi  > AŒj , then the
pair.i; j /is called aninversionofA.
a.List the five inversions of the arrayh2; 3; 8; 6; 1i.

42Chapter 2Getting Started
b.What array with elements from the set
f
1;2;:::;n
g
has the most inversions?
How many does it have?
c.What  is  the  relationship  between  the  running  time  of  insertion  sort  and  the
number of inversions in the input array? Justify your answer.
d.Give an algorithm that determines the number of inversions in any permutation
onnelements in‚.nlgn/worst-case time. (Hint:Modify merge sort.)
Chapter notes
In 1968, Knuth published the first of three volumes with the general titleThe Art of
Computer Programming[209, 210, 211].  The first volume ushered in the modern
study of computer algorithms with a focus on the analysis of running time, and the
full series remains an engaging and worthwhile reference for many of the topics
presented  here.   According  to  Knuth,  the  word  “algorithm”  is  derived  from  the
name “al-Khowˆarizmˆı,” a ninth-century Persian mathematician.
Aho,  Hopcroft,  and  Ullman  [5]  advocated  the  asymptotic  analysis  of  algo-
rithms—using  notations  that  Chapter  3  introduces,  including‚-notation—as  a
means of comparing relative performance.   They also popularized  the use of re-
currence relations to describe the running times of recursive algorithms.
Knuth [211] provides an encyclopedic treatment of many sorting algorithms. His
comparison of sorting algorithms (page 381) includes exact step-counting analyses,
like the one we performed here for insertion sort.  Knuth’s discussion of insertion
sort encompasses several variations of the algorithm.  The most important of these
is  Shell’s  sort,  introduced  by D.  L. Shell,  which uses  insertion  sort  on periodic
subsequences of the input to produce a faster sorting algorithm.
Merge sort is also described by Knuth.  He mentions that a mechanical  colla-
tor capable of merging two decks of punched cards in a single pass was invented
in 1938.   J. von  Neumann,  one of  the pioneers  of computer  science,  apparently
wrote a program for merge sort on the EDVAC computer in 1945.
The early history of proving programs correct is described by Gries [153], who
credits P. Naur with the first article in this field.  Gries attributes loop invariants to
R. W. Floyd.  The textbook by Mitchell [256] describes more recent progress in
proving programs correct.

3Growth of Functions
The order  of  growth of the running  time of  an algorithm,  defined in Chapter  2,
gives a simple characterization of the algorithm’s efficiency and also allows us to
compare the relative performance of alternative algorithms.  Once the input sizen
becomes  large  enough,  merge  sort,  with  its‚.nlgn/worst-case  running  time,
beats insertion  sort,  whose worst-case running  time is‚.n
2
/.  Although we can
sometimes determine the exact running time of an algorithm, as we did for insertion
sort in Chapter 2, the extra precision is not usually worth the effort of computing
it.  For large enough inputs, the multiplicative constants and lower-order terms of
an exact running time are dominated by the effects of the input size itself.
When we look at input sizes large enough to make only the order of growth of
the running time relevant, we are studying theasymptoticefficiency of algorithms.
That is, we are concerned with how the running time of an algorithm increases with
the size of the inputin the limit, as the size of the input increases without bound.
Usually, an algorithm that is asymptotically more efficient will be the best choice
for all but very small inputs.
This chapter gives several standard methods for simplifying the asymptotic anal-
ysis of algorithms.  The next section begins by defining several types of “asymp-
totic notation,” of which we have already seen an example in‚-notation. We then
present several notational  conventions  used throughout  this book,  and finally we
review the behavior of functions that commonly arise in the analysis of algorithms.
3.1  Asymptotic notation
The  notations  we  use  to  describe  the  asymptotic  running  time  of  an  algorithm
are defined in terms of functions  whose domains are the set of natural  numbers
ND
f
0; 1; 2; : : :
g
.   Such  notations  are  convenient  for  describing  the  worst-case
running-time functionT .n/, which usually is defined only on integer input sizes.
We sometimes find it convenient, however, toabuseasymptotic notation in a va-

44Chapter 3Growth of Functions
riety of ways.  For example, we might extend the notation to the domain of real
numbers or, alternatively, restrict it to a subset of the natural numbers.  We should
make sure, however, to understand the precise meaning of the notation so that when
we abuse, we do notmisuseit. This section defines the basic asymptotic notations
and also introduces some common abuses.
Asymptotic notation, functions, and running times
We will use asymptotic notation primarily to describe the running times of algo-
rithms, as when we wrote that insertion sort’s worst-case running time is‚.n
2
/.
Asymptotic notation actually applies to functions, however. Recall that we charac-
terized insertion sort’s worst-case running time asan
2
CbnCc, for some constants
a,b,andc.  By writing that insertion sort’s running time is‚.n
2
/, we abstracted
away some details of this function.  Because asymptotic notation applies to func-
tions, what we were writing as‚.n
2
/was the functionan
2
CbnCc,whichin
that case happened to characterize the worst-case running time of insertion sort.
In this book, the functions to which we apply asymptotic notation will usually
characterize the running times of algorithms. But asymptotic notation can apply to
functions that characterize some other aspect of algorithms (the amount of space
they use,  for example),  or even to functions  that have nothing  whatsoever  to do
with algorithms.
Even when we use asymptotic notation to apply to the running time of an al-
gorithm, we need to understandwhichrunning time we mean.  Sometimes we are
interested in the worst-case running time. Often, however, we wish to characterize
the running time no matter what the input.  In other words, we often wish to make
a blanket  statement  that  covers all inputs,  not just  the worst case.   We shall  see
asymptotic notations that are well suited to characterizing running times no matter
what the input.
‚-notation
In  Chapter  2,  we  found  that  the  worst-case  running  time  of  insertion  sort  is
T .n/D‚.n
2
/. Let us define what this notation means. For a given functiong.n/,
we denote by‚.g.n//theset of functions
‚.g.n//Dff .n/Wthere exist positive constantsc
1
,c
2
,andn
0
such that
0c
1
g.n/f .n/c
2
g.n/for allnn
0
g:
1
1
Within set notation, a colon means “such that.”

3.1Asymptotic notation45
(b)(c)(a)
nnn
n
0
n
0
n
0
f .n/D‚.g.n//f .n/DO.g.n//f .n/D.g.n//
f .n/
f .n/
f .n/
cg.n/
cg.n/
c
1
g.n/
c
2
g.n/
Figure 3.1Graphic examples of the‚,O,andnotations.  In each part, the value ofn
0
shown
is the minimum possible value; any greater value would also work.(a)‚-notation bounds a func-
tion to within constant factors.  We writef.n/D‚.g.n//if there exist positive constantsn
0
,c
1
,
andc
2
such that at and to the right ofn
0
,thevalueoff.n/always lies betweenc
1
g.n/andc
2
g.n/
inclusive.(b)O-notation gives an upper bound for a function to within a constant factor.  We write
f.n/DO.g.n//if there are positive constantsn
0
andcsuch that at and to the right ofn
0
,thevalue
off.n/always lies on or belowcg.n/.(c)-notation gives a lower bound for a function to within
a constant factor. We writef.n/D.g.n//if there are positive constantsn
0
andcsuch that at and
to the right ofn
0
,thevalueoff.n/always lies on or abovecg.n/.
A  functionf .n/belongs  to  the  set‚.g.n//if  there  exist  positive  constantsc
1
andc
2
such  that  it  can  be  “sandwiched”  betweenc
1
g.n/andc
2
g.n/,forsuffi-
ciently  largen.   Because‚.g.n//is  a  set,  we  could  write  “f .n/2‚.g.n//”
to  indicate  thatf .n/is  a  member  of‚.g.n//.   Instead,  we  will  usually  write
“f .n/D‚.g.n//” to express the same notion.  You might be confused because
we abuse equality in this way, but we shall see later in this section that doing so
has its advantages.
Figure  3.1(a)  gives  an  intuitive  picture  of  functionsf .n/andg.n/,where
f .n/D‚.g.n//.  For all values ofnat and to the right ofn
0
,thevalueoff .n/
lies at or abovec
1
g.n/and at or belowc
2
g.n/. In other words, for allnn
0
,the
functionf .n/is equal tog.n/to within a constant factor.  We say thatg.n/is an
asymptotically tight boundforf .n/.
The  definition  of‚.g.n//requires  that  every  memberf .n/2‚.g.n//be
asymptotically nonnegative, that is, thatf .n/be nonnegative whenevernis suf-
ficiently large.  (Anasymptotically positivefunction is one that is positive for all
sufficiently largen.) Consequently, the functiong.n/itself must be asymptotically
nonnegative, or else the set‚.g.n//is empty. We shall therefore assume that every
function used within‚-notation is asymptotically nonnegative.  This assumption
holds for the other asymptotic notations defined in this chapter as well.

46Chapter 3Growth of Functions
In Chapter  2,  we introduced  an informal  notion  of‚-notation  that  amounted
to  throwing  away  lower-order  terms  and  ignoring  the  leading  coefficient  of  the
highest-order  term.  Let us briefly justify this intuition  by using the formal defi-
nition  to show that
1
2
n
2
3nD‚.n
2
/.   To do so,  we must determine  positive
constantsc
1
,c
2
,andn
0
such that
c
1
n
2

1
2
n
2
3nc
2
n
2
for allnn
0
. Dividing byn
2
yields
c
1

1
2

3
n
c
2
:
We can make the right-hand inequality hold for any value ofn1by choosing any
constantc
2
1=2.  Likewise, we can make the left-hand inequality hold for any
value ofn7by choosing any constantc
1
1=14. Thus, by choosingc
1
D1=14,
c
2
D1=2,andn
0
D7, we can verify that
1
2
n
2
3nD‚.n
2
/.  Certainly, other
choices for the constants exist, but the important thing is thatsomechoice exists.
Note that these constants  depend on the function
1
2
n
2
3n;  a different  function
belonging to‚.n
2
/would usually require different constants.
We can  also  use the  formal  definition  to  verify  that6n
3
¤‚.n
2
/.   Suppose
for  the  purpose  of  contradiction  thatc
2
andn
0
exist  such  that6n
3
c
2
n
2
for
allnn
0
.  But then dividing byn
2
yieldsnc
2
=6, which cannot possibly hold
for arbitrarily largen,sincec
2
is constant.
Intuitively, the lower-order terms of an asymptotically positive function can be
ignored in determining asymptotically tight bounds because they are insignificant
for largen.Whennis large,  even a tiny fraction of the highest-order  term suf-
fices to dominate the lower-order terms.  Thus, settingc
1
to a value that is slightly
smaller than the coefficient of the highest-order term and settingc
2
to a value that
is slightly larger permits the inequalities in the definition of‚-notation to be sat-
isfied.  The coefficient of the highest-order term can likewise be ignored, since it
only changesc
1
andc
2
by a constant factor equal to the coefficient.
As an example, consider any quadratic functionf .n/Dan
2
CbnCc,where
a,b,andcare constants anda>0.  Throwing away the lower-order terms and
ignoring the constant yieldsf .n/D‚.n
2
/. Formally, to show the same thing, we
take the constantsc
1
Da=4,c
2
D7a=4,andn
0
D2max.
j
b
j
=a;
p
j
c
j
=a/.You
may verify that0c
1
n
2
an
2
CbnCcc
2
n
2
for allnn
0
.  In general,
for any polynomialp.n/D
P
d
iD0
a
i
n
i
, where thea
i
are constants anda
d
>0,we
havep.n/D‚.n
d
/(see Problem 3-1).
Since any constant is a degree-0polynomial, we can express any constant func-
tion as‚.n
0
/,or‚.1/. This latter notation is a minor abuse, however, because the

3.1Asymptotic notation47
expression does not indicate what variable is tending to infinity.
2
We shall often
use the notation‚.1/to mean either a constant or a constant function with respect
to some variable.
O-notation
The‚-notation asymptotically  bounds a function from above and below.  When
we have only anasymptotic upper bound,weuseO-notation.  For a given func-
tiong.n/, we denote byO.g.n//(pronounced  “big-oh ofgofn” or sometimes
just “oh ofgofn”) the set of functions
O.g.n//Dff .n/Wthere exist positive constantscandn
0
such that
0f .n/cg.n/for allnn
0
g:
We  useO-notation  to  give  an  upper  bound  on  a  function,  to  within  a  constant
factor. Figure 3.1(b) shows the intuition behindO-notation. For all valuesnat and
to the right ofn
0
, the value of the functionf .n/is on or belowcg.n/.
We writef .n/DO.g.n//to indicate that a functionf .n/isamemberofthe
setO.g.n//.   Note  thatf .n/D‚.g.n//impliesf .n/DO.g.n//,since‚-
notation is a stronger notion thanO-notation.  Written set-theoretically,  we have
‚.g.n//O.g.n//.  Thus, our proof that any quadratic functionan
2
CbnCc,
wherea>0,isin‚.n
2
/also shows that any such quadratic function is inO.n
2
/.
What may be more surprising is that whena>0,anylinearfunctionanCbis
inO.n
2
/, which is easily verified by takingcDaC
j
b
j
andn
0
Dmax.1;b=a/.
If you have seenO-notation  before,  you might find it strange  that  we should
write, for example,nDO.n
2
/.  In the literature, we sometimes findO-notation
informally describing asymptotically tight bounds,  that is, what we have defined
using‚-notation.   In this book,  however,  when we writef .n/DO.g.n//,we
are merely claiming that some constant multiple ofg.n/is an asymptotic upper
bound onf .n/, with no claim about how tight an upper bound it is.  Distinguish-
ing asymptotic upper bounds from asymptotically tight bounds is standard in the
algorithms literature.
UsingO-notation,  we  can  often  describe  the  running  time  of  an  algorithm
merely by inspecting  the algorithm’s  overall structure.  For example,  the doubly
nested loop structure of the insertion sort algorithm from Chapter 2 immediately
yields anO.n
2
/upper bound on the worst-case running time:  the cost of each it-
eration of the inner loop is bounded from above byO.1/(constant), the indicesi
2
The real problem is that our ordinary notation for functions does not distinguish functions from
values.  In-calculus, the parameters to a function are clearly specified:  the functionn
2
could be
written asn:n
2
,orevenr:r
2
.  Adopting a more rigorous notation,  however,  would complicate
algebraic manipulations, and so we choose to tolerate the abuse.

48Chapter 3Growth of Functions
andjare both at mostn, and the inner loop is executed at most once for each of
then
2
pairs of values foriandj.
SinceO-notation describes an upper bound, when we use it to bound the worst-
case running time of an algorithm, we have a bound on the running time of the algo-
rithm on every input—the blanket statement we discussed earlier. Thus, theO.n
2
/
bound on worst-case running time of insertion sort also applies to its running time
on every input. The‚.n
2
/bound on the worst-case running time of insertion sort,
however, does not imply a‚.n
2
/bound on the running time of insertion sort on
everyinput.   For  example,  we saw  in  Chapter  2  that  when  the  input  is  already
sorted, insertion sort runs in‚.n/time.
Technically, it is an abuse to say that the running time of insertion sort isO.n
2
/,
since  for  a givenn,  the  actual  running  time  varies,  depending  on  the  particular
input of sizen. When we say “the running time isO.n
2
/,” we mean that there is a
functionf .n/that isO.n
2
/such that for any value ofn, no matter what particular
input of sizenis chosen, the running time on that input is bounded from above by
the valuef .n/. Equivalently, we mean that the worst-case running time isO.n
2
/.
-notation
Just asO-notation provides an asymptoticupperbound on a function,-notation
provides  anasymptotic lower bound.    For  a  given  functiong.n/,  we  denote
by.g.n//(pronounced  “big-omega ofgofn” or sometimes just “omega ofg
ofn”) the set of functions
.g.n//Dff .n/Wthere exist positive constantscandn
0
such that
0cg.n/f .n/for allnn
0
g:
Figure 3.1(c) shows the intuition behind-notation.  For all valuesnat or to the
right ofn
0
,thevalueoff .n/is on or abovecg.n/.
From the definitions of the asymptotic notations we have seen thus far, it is easy
to prove the following important theorem (see Exercise 3.1-5).
Theorem 3.1
For any two functionsf .n/andg.n/,wehavef .n/D‚.g.n//if and only if
f .n/DO.g.n//andf .n/D.g.n//.
As an example of the application of this theorem, our proof thatan
2
CbnCcD
‚.n
2
/for  any  constantsa,b,andc,wherea>0,  immediately  implies  that
an
2
CbnCcD.n
2
/andan
2
CbnCcDO.n
2
/. In practice, rather than using
Theorem  3.1 to obtain  asymptotic  upper  and  lower  bounds  from  asymptotically
tight bounds, as we did for this example, we usually use it to prove asymptotically
tight bounds from asymptotic upper and lower bounds.

3.1Asymptotic notation49
When we say that therunning time(no modifier) of an algorithm is.g.n//,
we mean thatno matter what particular input of sizenis chosen for each value
ofn, the running time on that input is at least a constant timesg.n/, for sufficiently
largen.  Equivalently, we are giving a lower bound on the best-case running time
of an algorithm. For example, the best-case running time of insertion sort is.n/,
which implies that the running time of insertion sort is.n/.
The running time of insertion sort therefore belongs to both.n/andO.n
2
/,
since it falls anywhere between a linear function ofnand a quadratic function ofn.
Moreover, these bounds are asymptotically as tight as possible:  for instance, the
running time of insertion sort is not.n
2
/, since there exists an input for which
insertion sort runs in‚.n/time (e.g., when the input is already sorted).  It is not
contradictory,  however,  to say that theworst-caserunning time of insertion  sort
is.n
2
/, since there exists an input that causes the algorithm to take.n
2
/time.
Asymptotic notation in equations and inequalities
We have already seen how asymptotic notation can be used within mathematical
formulas.  For example, in introducingO-notation,  we wrote “nDO.n
2
/.”  We
might also write2n
2
C3nC1D2n
2
C‚.n/. How do we interpret such formulas?
When the asymptotic notation stands alone (that is, not within a larger formula)
on the right-hand side of an equation (or inequality),  as innDO.n
2
/,wehave
already defined the equal sign to mean set membership:n2O.n
2
/.  In general,
however, when asymptotic notation appears in a formula, we interpret it as stand-
ing for some anonymous function that we do not care to name.  For example, the
formula2n
2
C3nC1D2n
2
C‚.n/means that2n
2
C3nC1D2n
2
Cf .n/,
wheref .n/is some function in the set‚.n/. In this case, we letf .n/D3nC1,
which indeed is in‚.n/.
Using asymptotic notation in this manner can help eliminate inessential  detail
and clutter in an equation. For example, in Chapter 2 we expressed the worst-case
running time of merge sort as the recurrence
T .n/D2T .n=2/C‚.n/ :
If we are interested only in the asymptotic behavior ofT .n/, there is no point in
specifying all the lower-order terms exactly; they are all understood to be included
in the anonymous function denoted by the term‚.n/.
The number of anonymous functions in an expression is understood to be equal
to the number of times the asymptotic notation appears.  For example, in the ex-
pression
n
X
iD1
O.i/ ;

50Chapter 3Growth of Functions
there is only a single anonymous function (a function ofi). This expression is thus
notthe same asO.1/CO.2/CCO.n/,  which doesn’t  really have a clean
interpretation.
In some cases, asymptotic notation appears on the left-hand side of an equation,
as in
2n
2
C‚.n/D‚.n
2
/:
We interpret such equations using the following rule:No matter how the anony-
mous functions are chosen on the left of the equal sign, there is a way to choose
the anonymous functions on the right of the equal sign to make the equation valid.
Thus, our example means that foranyfunctionf .n/2‚.n/, there issomefunc-
tiong.n/2‚.n
2
/such that2n
2
Cf .n/Dg.n/for alln.  In other words, the
right-hand side of an equation provides a coarser level of detail than the left-hand
side.
We can chain together a number of such relationships, as in
2n
2
C3nC1D2n
2
C‚.n/
D‚.n
2
/:
We  can  interpret  each  equation  separately  by  the  rules  above.   The  first  equa-
tion  says  that there  issomefunctionf .n/2‚.n/such  that2n
2
C3nC1D
2n
2
Cf .n/for alln. The second equation says that foranyfunctiong.n/2‚.n/
(such  as  thef .n/just  mentioned),  there  issomefunctionh.n/2‚.n
2
/such
that2n
2
Cg.n/Dh.n/for  alln.    Note  that  this  interpretation  implies  that
2n
2
C3nC1D‚.n
2
/, which is what the chaining of equations intuitively gives
us.
o-notation
The asymptotic upper bound provided byO-notation may or may not be asymp-
totically  tight.   The bound2n
2
DO.n
2
/is asymptotically  tight,  but  the bound
2nDO.n
2
/is not. We useo-notation to denote an upper bound that is not asymp-
totically tight. We formally defineo.g.n//(“little-oh ofgofn”) as the set
o.g.n//Dff .n/Wfor any positive constantc>0, there exists a constant
n
0
>0such that0f .n/ < cg.n/for allnn
0
g:
For example,2nDo.n
2
/,but2n
2
¤o.n
2
/.
The definitions ofO-notation ando-notation are similar.  The main difference
is that inf .n/DO.g.n//, the bound0f .n/cg.n/holds forsomecon-
stantc>0,butinf .n/Do.g.n//, the bound0f .n/ < cg.n/holds forall
constantsc>0. Intuitively, ino-notation, the functionf .n/becomes insignificant
relative tog.n/asnapproaches infinity; that is,

3.1Asymptotic notation51
lim
n!1
f .n/
g.n/
D0:(3.1)
Some authors use this limit as a definition of theo-notation; the definition in this
book also restricts the anonymous functions to be asymptotically nonnegative.
!-notation
By analogy,!-notation is to-notation  aso-notation is toO-notation.   We use
!-notation to denote a lower bound that is not asymptotically tight.  One way to
define it is by
f .n/2!.g.n//if and only ifg.n/2o.f .n// :
Formally, however, we define!.g.n//(“little-omega ofgofn”) as the set
!.g.n//Dff .n/Wfor any positive constantc>0, there exists a constant
n
0
>0such that0cg.n/ < f .n/for allnn
0
g:
For example,n
2
=2D!.n/,butn
2
=2¤!.n
2
/.  The relationf .n/D!.g.n//
implies that
lim
n!1
f .n/
g.n/
D1;
if the limit exists.   That is,f .n/becomes  arbitrarily  large  relative  tog.n/asn
approaches infinity.
Comparing functions
Many of the relational properties of real numbers apply to asymptotic comparisons
as well. For the following, assume thatf .n/andg.n/are asymptotically positive.
Transitivity:
f .n/D‚.g.n//andg.n/D‚.h.n//implyf .n/D‚.h.n// ;
f .n/DO.g.n//andg.n/DO.h.n//implyf .n/DO.h.n// ;
f .n/D.g.n//andg.n/D.h.n//implyf .n/D.h.n// ;
f .n/Do.g.n//andg.n/Do.h.n//implyf .n/Do.h.n// ;
f .n/D!.g.n//andg.n/D!.h.n//implyf .n/D!.h.n// :
Reflexivity:
f .n/D‚.f .n// ;
f .n/DO.f .n// ;
f .n/D.f .n// :

52Chapter 3Growth of Functions
Symmetry:
f .n/D‚.g.n//if and only ifg.n/D‚.f .n// :
Transpose symmetry:
f .n/DO.g.n//if and only ifg.n/D.f .n// ;
f .n/Do.g.n//if and only ifg.n/D!.f .n// :
Because these properties hold for asymptotic notations, we can draw an analogy
between the asymptotic comparison of two functionsfandgand the comparison
of two real numbersaandb:
f .n/DO.g.n//is likeab;
f .n/D.g.n//is likeab;
f .n/D‚.g.n//is likeaDb;
f .n/Do.g.n//is likea<b;
f .n/D!.g.n//is likea>b:
We say thatf .n/isasymptotically smallerthang.n/iff .n/Do.g.n//,andf .n/
isasymptotically largerthang.n/iff .n/D!.g.n//.
One property of real numbers, however, does not carry over to asymptotic nota-
tion:
Trichotomy:For any two real numbersaandb, exactly one of the following must
hold:a<b,aDb,or
a>b.
Although any two real numbers can be compared, not all functions are asymptot-
ically comparable.  That is, for two functionsf .n/andg.n/, it may be the case
that neitherf .n/DO.g.n//norf .n/D.g.n//holds. For example, we cannot
compare the functionsnandn
1Csinn
using asymptotic notation, since the value of
the exponent inn
1Csinn
oscillates between 0 and 2, taking on all values in between.
Exercises
3.1-1
Letf .n/andg.n/be asymptotically nonnegative functions.  Using the basic defi-
nition of‚-notation, prove that max.f .n/; g.n//D‚.f .n/Cg.n//.
3.1-2
Show that for any real constantsaandb,whereb>0,
.nCa/
b
D‚.n
b
/:(3.2)

3.2Standard notations and common functions53
3.1-3
Explain why the statement, “The running time of algorithmAis at leastO.n
2
/,” is
meaningless.
3.1-4
Is2
nC1
DO.2
n
/?Is2
2n
DO.2
n
/?
3.1-5
Prove Theorem 3.1.
3.1-6
Prove that the running time of an algorithm is‚.g.n//if and only if its worst-case
running time isO.g.n//and its best-case running time is.g.n//.
3.1-7
Prove thato.g.n//\!.g.n//is the empty set.
3.1-8
We can extend our notation to the case of two parametersnandmthat can go to
infinity independently at different rates.  For a given functiong.n; m/, we denote
byO.g.n; m//the set of functions
O.g.n; m//Dff.n;m/Wthere exist positive constantsc,n
0
,andm
0
such that0f.n;m/cg.n; m/
for allnn
0
ormm
0
g:
Give corresponding definitions for.g.n; m//and‚.g.n; m//.
3.2  Standard notations and common functions
This section reviews some standard mathematical functions and notations and ex-
plores the relationships among them.  It also illustrates the use of the asymptotic
notations.
Monotonicity
A functionf .n/ismonotonically increasingifmnimpliesf.m/f .n/.
Similarly,  it ismonotonically decreasingifmnimpliesf.m/f .n/.A
functionf .n/isstrictly increasingifm<nimpliesf .m/ < f .n/andstrictly
decreasingifm<nimpliesf .m/ > f .n/.

54Chapter 3Growth of Functions
Floors and ceilings
For any real numberx, we denote the greatest integer less than or equal toxby
b
x
c
(read “the floor ofx”) and the least integer greater than or equal toxby
d
x
e
(read
“the ceiling ofx”). For all realx,
x1<
b
x
c
x
d
x
e
<xC1:(3.3)
For any integern,
d
n=2
e
C
b
n=2
c
Dn;
and for any real numberx0and integersa; b > 0,

d
x=a
e
b

D
l
x
ab
m
;(3.4)

b
x=a
c
b
	
D
j
x
ab
k
;(3.5)
l
a
b
m

aC.b1/
b
;(3.6)
j
a
b
k

a.b1/
b
:(3.7)
The floor functionf.x/D
b
x
c
is monotonically increasing, as is the ceiling func-
tionf.x/D
d
x
e
.
Modular arithmetic
For any integeraand any positive integern,thevalueamodnis theremainder
(orresidue) of the quotienta=n:
amodnDan
b
a=n
c
:(3.8)
It follows that
0amodn<n:(3.9)
Given a well-defined notion of the remainder of one integer when divided by an-
other, it is convenient to provide special notation to indicate equality of remainders.
If.amodn/D.bmodn/, we writeab.modn/and say thataisequivalent
tob, modulon. In other words,ab.modn/ifaandbhave the same remain-
der when divided byn.  Equivalently,ab.modn/if and only ifnis a divisor
ofba
. We writea6b.modn/ifais not equivalent tob, modulon.

3.2Standard notations and common functions55
Polynomials
Given a nonnegative integerd,apolynomial innof degreedis a functionp.n/
of the form
p.n/D
d
X
iD0
a
i
n
i
;
where  the  constantsa
0
;a
1
;:::;a
d
are  thecoefficientsof  the  polynomial  and
a
d
¤0.  A polynomial is asymptotically  positive if and only ifa
d
>0.Foran
asymptotically positive polynomialp.n/of degreed,wehavep.n/D‚.n
d
/.For
any real constanta0, the functionn
a
is monotonically increasing, and for any
real constanta0, the functionn
a
is monotonically decreasing.  We say that a
functionf .n/ispolynomially boundediff .n/DO.n
k
/for some constantk.
Exponentials
For all reala>0,m,andn, we have the following identities:
a
0
D1;
a
1
Da;
a
1
D1=a ;
.a
m
/
n
Da
mn
;
.a
m
/
n
D.a
n
/
m
;
a
m
a
n
Da
mCn
:
For  allnanda1,  the  functiona
n
is  monotonically  increasing  inn.When
convenient, we shall assume0
0
D1.
We can relate the rates of growth of polynomials and exponentials by the fol-
lowing fact. For all real constantsaandbsuch thata>1,
lim
n!1
n
b
a
n
D0;(3.10)
from which we can conclude that
n
b
Do.a
n
/:
Thus, any exponential function with a base strictly greater than1grows faster than
any polynomial function.
Usingeto denote2:71828 : : :,  the base of the natural  logarithm  function,  we
have for all realx,
e
x
D1CxC
x
2
2Š
C
x
3
3Š
CD
1
X
iD0
x
i
iŠ
;(3.11)

56Chapter 3Growth of Functions
where “Š” denotes the factorial function defined later in this section. For all realx,
we have the inequality
e
x
1Cx;(3.12)
where equality holds only whenxD0.When
j
x
j
1, we have the approximation
1Cxe
x
1CxCx
2
:(3.13)
Whenx!0, the approximation ofe
x
by1Cxis quite good:
e
x
D1CxC‚.x
2
/:
(In this equation, the asymptotic notation is used to describe the limiting behavior
asx!0rather than asx!1.) We have for allx,
lim
n!1

1C
x
n

n
De
x
:(3.14)
Logarithms
We shall use the following notations:
lgnDlog
2
n(binary logarithm)  ,
lnnDlog
e
n(natural logarithm)  ,
lg
k
nD.lgn/
k
(exponentiation)  ,
lg lgnDlg.lgn/(composition)  .
An important notational convention we shall adopt is thatlogarithm functions will
apply only to the next term in the formula,sothatlgnCkwill mean.lgn/Ck
and not lg.nCk/.  If we holdb>1constant, then forn>0, the function log
b
n
is strictly increasing.
For all reala>0,b>0,c>0,andn,
aDb
log
b
a
;
log
c
.ab/Dlog
c
aClog
c
b;
log
b
a
n
Dnlog
b
a;
log
b
aD
log
c
a
log
c
b
;(3.15)
log
b
.1=a/Dlog
b
a;
log
b
aD
1
log
a
b
;
a
log
b
c
Dc
log
b
a
;(3.16)
where, in each equation above, logarithm bases are not1.

3.2Standard notations and common functions57
By equation (3.15), changing the base of a logarithm from one constant to an-
other changes the value of the logarithm by only a constant factor, and so we shall
often use the notation “lgn” when we don’t care about constant factors, such as in
O-notation.  Computer scientists find2to be the most natural base for logarithms
because so many algorithms  and data structures  involve splitting  a problem into
two parts.
There is a simple series expansion for ln.1Cx/when
j
x
j
<1:
ln.1Cx/Dx
x
2
2
C
x
3
3

x
4
4
C
x
5
5
:
We also have the following inequalities forx>1:
x
1Cx
ln.1Cx/x;(3.17)
where equality holds only forxD0.
We say that a functionf .n/ispolylogarithmically boundediff .n/DO.lg
k
n/
for some constantk. We can relate the growth of polynomials and polylogarithms
by substituting lgnfornand2
a
forain equation (3.10), yielding
lim
n!1
lg
b
n
.2
a
/
lgn
Dlim
n!1
lg
b
n
n
a
D0:
From this limit, we can conclude that
lg
b
nDo.n
a
/
for any constanta>0.  Thus, any positive polynomial function grows faster than
any polylogarithmic function.
Factorials
The notationnŠ(read “nfactorial”) is defined for integersn0as
nŠD
(
1ifnD0;
n.n1/Šifn>0:
Thus,nŠD123n.
A weak upper bound on the factorial function isnŠn
n
, since each of then
terms in the factorial product is at mostn.Stirling’s approximation,
nŠD
p
2 n

n
e

n

1C‚

1
n

;(3.18)

58Chapter 3Growth of Functions
whereeis the base of the natural logarithm, gives us a tighter upper bound, and a
lower bound as well. As Exercise 3.2-3 asks you to prove,
nŠDo.n
n
/;
nŠD!.2
n
/;
lg.nŠ/D‚.nlgn/ ;(3.19)
where Stirling’s approximation is helpful in proving equation (3.19). The following
equation also holds for alln1:
nŠD
p
2 n

n
e

n
e
 ̨
n
(3.20)
where
1
12nC1
< ̨
n
<
1
12n
:(3.21)
Functional iteration
We use the notationf
.i /
.n/to denote the functionf .n/iteratively applieditimes
to an initial value ofn.  Formally, letf .n/be a function over the reals.  For non-
negative integersi, we recursively define
f
.i /
.n/D
(
nifiD0;
f.f
.i1/
.n//ifi>0:
For example, iff .n/D2n,thenf
.i /
.n/D2
i
n.
The iterated logarithm function
We use the notation lg

n(read “log star ofn”) to denote the iterated logarithm, de-
fined as follows. Let lg
.i /
nbe as defined above, withf .n/Dlgn. Because the log-
arithm of a nonpositive number is undefined, lg
.i /
nis defined only if lg
.i1/
n>0.
Be sure to distinguish lg
.i /
n(the logarithm function applieditimes in succession,
starting with argumentn) from lg
i
n(the logarithm ofnraised to theith power).
Then we define the iterated logarithm function as
lg

nDmin
 ̊
i0Wlg
.i /
n1


:
The iterated logarithm is averyslowly growing function:
lg

2D1;
lg

4D2;
lg

16D3;
lg

65536D4;
lg

.2
65536
/D5:

3.2Standard notations and common functions59
Since the number of atoms in the observable universe is estimated to be about10
80
,
which  is  much  less  than2
65536
,  we  rarely  encounter  an  input  sizensuch  that
lg

n>5.
Fibonacci numbers
We define theFibonacci numbersby the following recurrence:
F
0
D0;
F
1
D1;(3.22)
F
i
DF
i1
CF
i2
fori2:
Thus,  each Fibonacci  number  is the sum of the two previous  ones,  yielding  the
sequence
0; 1;  1;  2; 3;  5;  8;  13;  21;  34;  55;  : : :  :
Fibonacci numbers are related to thegolden ratioand to its conjugate
y
,which
are the two roots of the equation
x
2
DxC1(3.23)
and are given by the following formulas (see Exercise 3.2-6):
D
1C
p
5
2
(3.24)
D1:61803 : : :  ;
y
D
1
p
5
2
D:61803 : : :  :
Specifically, we have
F
i
D

i

y

i
p
5
;
which we can prove by induction (Exercise 3.2-7). Since
ˇ
ˇ
y

ˇ
ˇ
<1,wehave
ˇ
ˇ
y

i
ˇ
ˇ
p
5
<
1
p
5
<
1
2
;
which implies that

60Chapter 3Growth of Functions
F
i
D


i
p
5
C
1
2
	
;(3.25)
which is to say that theith Fibonacci numberF
i
is equal to
i
=
p
5rounded to the
nearest integer. Thus, Fibonacci numbers grow exponentially.
Exercises
3.2-1
Show that iff .n/andg.n/are monotonically  increasing  functions,  then so are
the  functionsf .n/Cg.n/andf .g.n//,andiff .n/andg.n/are  in  addition
nonnegative, thenf .n/g.n/is monotonically increasing.
3.2-2
Prove equation (3.16).
3.2-3
Prove equation (3.19). Also prove thatnŠD!.2
n
/andnŠDo.n
n
/.
3.2-4?
Is the function
d
lgn
e
Špolynomially bounded? Is the function
d
lg lgn
e
Špolynomi-
ally bounded?
3.2-5?
Which is asymptotically larger: lg.lg

n/or lg

.lgn/?
3.2-6
Show  that  the  golden  ratioand  its  conjugate
y
both  satisfy  the  equation
x
2
DxC1.
3.2-7
Prove by induction that theith Fibonacci number satisfies the equality
F
i
D

i

y

i
p
5
;
whereis the golden ratio and
y
is its conjugate.
3.2-8
Show thatklnkD‚.n/implieskD‚.n=lnn/.

Problems for Chapter 361
Problems
3-1  Asymptotic behavior of polynomials
Let
p.n/D
d
X
iD0
a
i
n
i
;
wherea
d
>0,beadegree-dpolynomial inn,andletkbe a constant.  Use the
definitions of the asymptotic notations to prove the following properties.
a.Ifkd,thenp.n/DO.n
k
/.
b.Ifkd,thenp.n/D.n
k
/.
c.IfkDd,thenp.n/D‚.n
k
/.
d.Ifk>d,thenp.n/Do.n
k
/.
e.Ifk<d,thenp.n/D!.n
k
/.
3-2  Relative asymptotic growths
Indicate, for each pair of expressions.A; B/in the table below, whetherAisO,o,
,!,or‚ofB. Assume thatk1,>0,andc>1are constants. Your answer
should be in the form of the table with “yes” or “no” written in each box.
AB
Oo!‚
a.lg
k
nn

b.n
k
c
n
c.
p
nn
sinn
d.2
n
2
n=2
e.n
lgc
c
lgn
f.lg.nŠ/lg.n
n
/
3-3  Ordering by asymptotic growth rates
a.Rank the following functions by order of growth; that is, find an arrangement
g
1
;g
2
;:::;g
30
of  the  functions  satisfyingg
1
D.g
2
/,g
2
D.g
3
/, ...,
g
29
D.g
30
/.  Partition your list into equivalence classes such that functions
f .n/andg.n/are in the same class if and only iff .n/D‚.g.n//.

62Chapter 3Growth of Functions
lg.lg

n/2
lg

n
.
p
2/
lgn
n
2
nŠ.lgn/Š
.
3
2
/
n
n
3
lg
2
nlg.nŠ/2
2
n
n
1=lgn
ln lnnlg

nn2
n
n
lg lgn
lnn1
2
lgn
.lgn/
lgn
e
n
4
lgn
.nC1/Š
p
lgn
lg

.lgn/2
p
2lgn
n2
n
nlgn2
2
nC1
b.Give an example of a single nonnegative functionf .n/such that for all func-
tionsg
i
.n/in part (a),f .n/is neitherO.g
i
.n//nor.g
i
.n//.
3-4  Asymptotic notation properties
Letf .n/andg.n/be asymptotically positive functions. Prove or disprove each of
the following conjectures.
a.f .n/DO.g.n//impliesg.n/DO.f .n//.
b.f .n/Cg.n/D‚.min.f .n/; g.n///.
c.f .n/DO.g.n//implies lg.f .n//DO.lg.g.n///, where lg.g.n//1and
f .n/1for all sufficiently largen.
d.f .n/DO.g.n//implies2
f.n/
DO

2
g.n/

.
e.f .n/DO ..f .n//
2
/.
f.f .n/DO.g.n//impliesg.n/D.f .n//.
g.f .n/D‚.f .n=2//.
h.f .n/Co.f .n//D‚.f .n//.
3-5  Variations onOand ̋
Some authors definein a slightly different way than we do;  let’s use
1
(read
“omega infinity”) for this alternative definition.  We say thatf .n/D
1
.g.n//if
there exists a positive constantcsuch thatf .n/cg.n/0for infinitely many
integersn.
a.Show that for any two functionsf .n/andg.n/that are asymptotically nonneg-
ative, eitherf .n/DO.g.n//orf .n/D
1
.g.n//or both, whereas this is not
true if we usein place of
1
.

Problems for Chapter 363
b.Describe the potential advantages and disadvantages of using
1
instead ofto
characterize the running times of programs.
Some authors  also  defineOin  a slightly  different  manner;  let’s  useO
0
for  the
alternative  definition.   We  say  thatf .n/DO
0
.g.n//if  and  only  if
j
f .n/
j
D
O.g.n//.
c.What happens to each direction of the “if and only if” in Theorem 3.1 if we
substituteO
0
forObut still use?
Some authors define
e
O(read “soft-oh”)  to meanOwith logarithmic  factors  ig-
nored:
e
O.g.n//Dff .n/Wthere exist positive constantsc,k,andn
0
such that
0f .n/cg.n/lg
k
.n/for allnn
0
g:
d.Define
e
and
e
‚in a similar manner. Prove the corresponding analog to Theo-
rem 3.1.
3-6  Iterated functions
We can apply the iteration operator

used in the lg

function to any monotonically
increasing functionf .n/over the reals. For a given constantc2R,wedefinethe
iterated functionf

c
by
f

c
.n/Dmin
 ̊
i0Wf
.i /
.n/c


;
which need not be well defined in all cases.  In other words, the quantityf

c
.n/is
the number of iterated applications of the functionfrequired to reduce its argu-
ment down tocor less.
For each of the following functionsf .n/and constantsc, give as tight a bound
as possible onf

c
.n/.
f .n/c
f

c
.n/
a.n10
b.lgn1
c.n=21
d.n=22
e.
p
n2
f.
p
n1
g.n
1=3
2
h.n=lgn2

64Chapter 3Growth of Functions
Chapter notes
Knuth [209] traces the origin of theO-notation to a number-theory text by P. Bach-
mann in 1892. Theo-notation was invented by E. Landau in 1909 for his discussion
of the distribution of prime numbers.  Theand‚notations were advocated by
Knuth [213] to correct the popular, but technically sloppy, practice in the literature
of usingO-notation for both upper and lower bounds.  Many people continue to
use theO-notation where the‚-notation is more technically precise.  Further dis-
cussion of the history and development of asymptotic notations appears in works
by Knuth [209, 213] and Brassard and Bratley [54].
Not all authors define the asymptotic notations  in the same way, although the
various definitions agree in most common situations.  Some of the alternative def-
initions encompass functions that are not asymptotically  nonnegative,  as long as
their absolute values are appropriately bounded.
Equation (3.20) is due to Robbins [297].  Other properties of elementary math-
ematical  functions  can  be  found  in  any  good  mathematical  reference,  such  as
Abramowitz  and Stegun  [1]  or  Zwillinger  [362],  or  in a calculus  book,  such  as
Apostol [18] or Thomas et al. [334]. Knuth [209] and Graham, Knuth, and Patash-
nik [152] contain a wealth of material on discrete mathematics as used in computer
science.

4Divide-and-Conquer
In Section 2.3.1, we saw how merge sort serves as an example of the divide-and-
conquer paradigm.  Recall that in divide-and-conquer,  we solve a problem recur-
sively, applying three steps at each level of the recursion:
Dividethe problem into a number of subproblems that are smaller instances of the
same problem.
Conquerthe subproblems by solving them recursively. If the subproblem sizes are
small enough, however, just solve the subproblems in a straightforward manner.
Combinethe solutions to the subproblems into the solution for the original prob-
lem.
When the subproblems are large enough to solve recursively, we call that therecur-
sive case.  Once the subproblems become small enough that we no longer recurse,
we say that the recursion “bottoms out” and that we have gotten down to thebase
case. Sometimes, in addition to subproblems that are smaller instances of the same
problem, we have to solve subproblems that are not quite the same as the original
problem. We consider solving such subproblems as part of the combine step.
In this chapter, we shall see more algorithms based on divide-and-conquer.  The
first one solves the maximum-subarray problem: it takes as input an array of num-
bers, and it determines the contiguous subarray whose values have the greatest sum.
Then we shall see two divide-and-conquer algorithms for multiplyingn	nmatri-
ces. One runs in‚.n
3
/time, which is no better than the straightforward method of
multiplying square matrices.  But the other, Strassen’s algorithm, runs inO.n
2:81
/
time, which beats the straightforward method asymptotically.
Recurrences
Recurrences go hand in hand with the divide-and-conquer paradigm, because they
give us a natural way to characterize the running times of divide-and-conquer algo-
rithms. Arecurrenceis an equation or inequality that describes a function in terms

66Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
of  its  value  on  smaller  inputs.   For  example,  in  Section  2.3.2  we  described  the
worst-case running timeT .n/of the M
ERGE-SORTprocedure by the recurrence
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
2T .n=2/C‚.n/ifn>1;
(4.1)
whose solution we claimed to beT .n/D‚.nlgn/.
Recurrences  can take many forms.   For example,  a recursive algorithm  might
divide subproblems into unequal sizes, such as a2=3-to-1=3split. If the divide and
combine steps take linear time, such an algorithm would give rise to the recurrence
T .n/DT .2n=3/CT .n=3/C‚.n/.
Subproblems  are  not  necessarily  constrained  to  being  a  constant  fraction  of
the  original  problem  size.    For  example,  a  recursive  version  of  linear  search
(see  Exercise  2.1-3)  would  create  just  one  subproblem  containing  only  one  el-
ement  fewer  than  the  original  problem.    Each  recursive  call  would  take  con-
stant time plus the time for the recursive  calls it makes,  yielding  the recurrence
T .n/DT.n1/C‚.1/.
This chapter offers three methods for solving recurrences—that is, for obtaining
asymptotic “‚”or“O” bounds on the solution:

In thesubstitution method, we guess a bound and then use mathematical in-
duction to prove our guess correct.

Therecursion-tree methodconverts  the  recurrence  into  a  tree  whose  nodes
represent the costs incurred at various levels of the recursion. We use techniques
for bounding summations to solve the recurrence.

Themaster methodprovides bounds for recurrences of the form
T .n/DaT .n=b/Cf .n/ ;(4.2)
wherea1,b>1,andf .n/is a given function.   Such recurrences  arise
frequently.  A recurrence of the form in equation (4.2) characterizes a divide-
and-conquer  algorithm  that  createsasubproblems,  each of which is1=bthe
size of the original problem, and in which the divide and combine steps together
takef .n/time.
To use the master  method,  you  will need  to memorize three  cases,  but  once
you do that, you will easily be able to determine asymptotic bounds for many
simple recurrences.  We will use the master method to determine the running
times of the divide-and-conquer algorithms for the maximum-subarray problem
and for matrix multiplication, as well as for other algorithms based on divide-
and-conquer elsewhere in this book.

Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer67
Occasionally, we shall see recurrences that are not equalities but rather inequal-
ities,  such asT .n/2T .n=2/C‚.n/.  Because such a recurrence  states only
an upper bound onT .n/, we will couch its solution usingO-notation rather than
‚-notation. Similarly, if the inequality were reversed toT .n/2T .n=2/C‚.n/,
then  because  the  recurrence  gives  only  a  lower  bound  onT .n/,  we  would  use
-notation in its solution.
Technicalities in recurrences
In  practice,  we neglect  certain  technical  details  when  we  state  and  solve  recur-
rences.  For example, if we call M
ERGE-SORTonnelements whennis odd, we
end up with subproblems of size
b
n=2
c
and
d
n=2
e
.  Neither size is actuallyn=2,
becausen=2is not an integer whennis odd. Technically, the recurrence describing
the worst-case running time of M
ERGE-SORTis really
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
T.
d
n=2
e
/CT.
b
n=2
c
/C‚.n/ifn>1:
(4.3)
Boundary conditions represent another class of details that we typically ignore.
Since  the  running  time  of  an  algorithm  on  a  constant-sized  input  is  a  constant,
the  recurrences  that  arise  from  the  running  times  of  algorithms  generally  have
T .n/D‚.1/for  sufficiently  smalln.   Consequently,  for  convenience,  we shall
generally omit statements of the boundary conditions of recurrences and assume
thatT .n/is constant for smalln. For example, we normally state recurrence (4.1)
as
T .n/D2T .n=2/C‚.n/ ;(4.4)
without explicitly giving values for smalln. The reason is that although changing
the value ofT.1/changes the exact solution to the recurrence,  the solution typi-
cally doesn’t change by more than a constant factor, and so the order of growth is
unchanged.
When we state and solve recurrences, we often omit floors, ceilings, and bound-
ary conditions.  We forge ahead without these details and later determine whether
or not they matter.  They usually do not, but you should know when they do.  Ex-
perience helps, and so do some theorems stating that these details do not affect the
asymptotic bounds of many recurrences  characterizing  divide-and-conquer  algo-
rithms (see Theorem 4.1). In this chapter, however, we shall address some of these
details and illustrate the fine points of recurrence solution methods.

68Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
4.1  The maximum-subarray problem
Suppose that you been offered the opportunity to invest in the Volatile Chemical
Corporation.   Like  the  chemicals  the  company  produces,  the  stock  price  of  the
Volatile Chemical Corporation is rather volatile.  You are allowed to buy one unit
of stock only one time and then sell it at a later date, buying and selling after the
close of trading for the day.  To compensate for this restriction, you are allowed to
learn what the price of the stock will be in the future.  Your goal is to maximize
your  profit.   Figure 4.1 shows the price of the stock over a 17-day  period.   You
may buy the stock at any one time,  starting after  day 0,  when the price is $100
per share.  Of course, you would want to “buy low, sell high”—buy at the lowest
possible  price  and later  on sell  at the highest  possible  price—to  maximize your
profit. Unfortunately, you might not be able to buy at the lowest price and then sell
at the highest price within a given period.  In Figure 4.1, the lowest price occurs
after day 7, which occurs after the highest price, after day 1.
You might  think that  you can always  maximize profit  by either  buying  at the
lowest price or selling at the highest price.  For example, in Figure 4.1, we would
maximize profit by buying at the lowest price, after day 7.  If this strategy always
worked, then it would be easy to determine how to maximize profit: find the highest
and lowest prices, and then work left from the highest price to find the lowest prior
price,  work  right  from  the  lowest  price  to  find  the  highest  later  price,  and  take
the pair with the greater difference.  Figure 4.2 shows a simple counterexample,
012345678910111213141516
120
110
100
90
80
70
60
Day0123456789   10111213   14   15   16
Price100   113   11085   105   1028663   81   101   94   106   10179   94   90   97
Change
133252031623   1820712522   1547
Figure 4.1Information about the price of stock in the Volatile Chemical Corporation after the close
of trading over a period of 17 days. The horizontal axis of the chart indicates the day, and the vertical
axis shows the price. The bottom row of the table gives the change in price from the previous day.

4.1The maximum-subarray problem69
01234
11
10
9
8
7
6
Day01 23 4
Price10    117106
Change
1434
Figure 4.2An example showing that the maximum profit does not always start at the lowest price
or end at the highest price.  Again, the horizontal axis indicates the day, and the vertical axis shows
the price.  Here,  the maximum  profit of $3 per share would be earned by buying after day 2 and
selling after day 3.  The price of $7 after day 2 is not the lowest price overall, and the price of $10
after day 3 is not the highest price overall.
demonstrating that the maximum profit sometimes comes neither by buying at the
lowest price nor by selling at the highest price.
A brute-force solution
We can easily devise a brute-force solution to this problem: just try every possible
pair of buy and sell dates in which the buy date precedes the sell date. A period ofn
days has

n
2

such pairs of dates.  Since

n
2

is‚.n
2
/, and the best we can hope for
is to evaluate each pair of dates in constant time, this approach would take.n
2
/
time. Can we do better?
A transformation
In order to design an algorithm  with ano.n
2
/running time, we will look at the
input in a slightly different way.  We want to find a sequence of days over which
the net change from the first day to the last is maximum. Instead of looking at the
daily prices, let us instead consider the daily change in price, where the change on
dayiis the difference between the prices after dayi1and after dayi. The table
in Figure 4.1 shows these daily changes in the bottom row.  If we treat this row as
an arrayA, shown in Figure 4.3, we now want to find the nonempty, contiguous
subarray ofAwhose values have the largest sum. We call this contiguous subarray
themaximum subarray.  For example, in the array of Figure 4.3, the maximum
subarray ofAŒ1 : : 16isAŒ8 : : 11, with the sum43. Thus, you would want to buy
the stock just before day 8 (that is, after day 7) and sell it after day 11, earning a
profit of $43 per share.
At  first  glance,  this  transformation  does  not  help.We  still  need  to  check

n1
2

D‚.n
2
/subarrays for a period ofndays.  Exercise 4.1-2 asks you to show

70Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
13
1
–3
2
–25
3
20
4
–3
5
–16
6
–23
78910
maximum subarray
11
18
12
20
13
–7
14
12
15
7
16
–5  –22   15   –4A
Figure 4.3The  change  in  stock  prices  as  a  maximum-subarray  problem.Here,  the  subar-
rayAŒ8 : : 11,withsum43, has the greatest sum of any contiguous subarray of arrayA.
that although computing the cost of one subarray might take time proportional to
the length of the subarray, when computing all‚.n
2
/subarray sums, we can orga-
nize the computation so that each subarray sum takesO.1/time, given the values
of previously computed subarray sums, so that the brute-force solution takes‚.n
2
/
time.
So  let  us  seek  a  more  efficient  solution  to  the  maximum-subarray  problem.
When doing so, we will usually speak of “a” maximum subarray rather than “the”
maximum subarray, since there could be more than one subarray that achieves the
maximum sum.
The  maximum-subarray  problem  is  interesting  only  when  the  array  contains
some  negative  numbers.If  all  the  array  entries  were  nonnegative,  then  the
maximum-subarray  problem  would  present  no  challenge,  since  the  entire  array
would give the greatest sum.
A solution using divide-and-conquer
Let’s  think  about  how  we  might  solve  the  maximum-subarray  problem  using
the divide-and-conquer  technique.   Suppose  we want  to find a maximum  subar-
ray  of  the  subarrayAŒlow::high.   Divide-and-conquer  suggests  that  we divide
the  subarray  into  two  subarrays  of  as  equal  size  as  possible.   That  is,  we  find
the midpoint,  saymid, of the subarray,  and consider  the subarraysAŒlow::mid
andAŒmidC1::high. As Figure 4.4(a) shows, any contiguous subarrayAŒi : : j 
ofAŒlow::highmust lie in exactly one of the following places:

entirely in the subarrayAŒlow::mid,sothatlowijmid,

entirely in the subarrayAŒmidC1::high,sothatmid<ijhigh,or

crossing the midpoint, so thatlowimid<jhigh.
Therefore, a maximum subarray ofAŒlow::highmust lie in exactly one of these
places.   In  fact,  a  maximum  subarray  ofAŒlow::highmust  have  the  greatest
sum  over  all  subarrays  entirely  inAŒlow::mid,  entirely  inAŒmidC1::high,
or crossing the midpoint.  We can find maximum subarrays ofAŒlow::midand
AŒmidC1::highrecursively, because these two subproblems are smaller instances
of the problem of finding a maximum subarray.  Thus, all that is left to do is find a

4.1The maximum-subarray problem71
(a)(b)
lowlowmidmidhighhigh
crosses the midpoint
midC1midC1
entirely inAŒlow::midentirely inAŒmidC1::high
i
j
AŒi : :mid
AŒmidC1::j
Figure 4.4  (a)Possible locations of subarrays ofAŒlow::high: entirely inAŒlow::mid,entirely
inAŒmidC1::high,  or crossing the midpointmid.(b)Any subarray ofAŒlow::highcrossing
the midpoint comprises two subarraysAŒi : :midandAŒmidC1::j,wherelowimidand
mid<jhigh.
maximum subarray that crosses the midpoint, and take a subarray with the largest
sum of the three.
We can  easily  find a maximum  subarray  crossing  the midpoint  in time linear
in the size of the subarrayAŒlow::high.  This problem isnota smaller instance
of our original  problem,  because it has the added restriction  that the subarray  it
chooses must cross the midpoint.  As Figure 4.4(b) shows, any subarray crossing
the midpoint is itself made of two subarraysAŒi : :midandAŒmidC1::j,where
lowimidandmid<jhigh.  Therefore, we just need to find maximum
subarrays of the formAŒi : :midandAŒmidC1::jand then combine them. The
procedure F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAYtakes as input the arrayAand the
indiceslow,mid,andhigh, and it returns a tuple containing the indices demarcating
a maximum subarray that crosses the midpoint, along with the sum of the values in
a maximum subarray.
F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY.A;low;mid;high/
1left-sumD1
2sumD0
3foriDmiddowntolow
4sumDsumCAŒi 
5ifsum>left-sum
6left-sumDsum
7max-leftDi
8right-sumD1
9sumD0
10forjDmidC1tohigh
11sumDsumCAŒj 
12ifsum>right-sum
13right-sumDsum
14max-rightDj
15return.max-left;max-right
;left-sumCright-sum/

72Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
This procedure works as follows.  Lines 1–7 find a maximum subarray of the
left half,AŒlow::mid.  Since this subarray must containAŒmid,theforloop of
lines 3–7 starts the indexiatmidand works down tolow, so that every subarray
it considers is of the formAŒi : :mid.  Lines 1–2 initialize the variablesleft-sum,
which holds the greatest sum found so far, andsum, holding the sum of the entries
inAŒi : :mid.  Whenever we find, in line 5, a subarrayAŒi : :midwith a sum of
values greater thanleft-sum, we updateleft-sumto this subarray’s sum in line 6, and
in line 7 we update the variablemax-leftto record this indexi.  Lines 8–14 work
analogously for the right half,AŒmidC1::high. Here, theforloop of lines 10–14
starts the indexjatmidC1and works up tohigh, so that every subarray it considers
is of the formAŒmidC1::j.  Finally,  line 15 returns the indicesmax-leftand
max-rightthat demarcate a maximum subarray crossing the midpoint, along with
the sumleft-sumCright-sumof the values in the subarrayAŒ
max-left::max-right.
If the subarrayAŒlow::highcontainsnentries (so thatnDhighlowC1),
we  claim  that   the  call   F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY.A;low;mid;high/
takes‚.n/time.   Since  each  iteration  of  each  of  the  twoforloops  takes‚.1/
time, we just need to count up how many iterations there are altogether.  Thefor
loop of lines 3–7 makesmidlowC1iterations, and theforloop of lines 10–14
makeshighmiditerations, and so the total number of iterations is
.midlowC1/C.highmid/DhighlowC1
Dn:
With a linear-time F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAYprocedure in hand, we
can write pseudocode for a divide-and-conquer algorithm to solve the maximum-
subarray problem:
F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY.A;low;high/
1ifhigh
==low
2return.low;high;AŒlow///base case: only one element
3elsemidD
b
.lowChigh/=2
c
4.left-low;left-high;left-sum/D
F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY.A;low;mid/
5.right-low;right-high;right-sum/D
F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY.A;midC1;high/
6.cross-low;cross-high;cross-sum/D
F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY.A;low;mid;high/
7ifleft-sumright-sumandleft-sumcross-sum
8return.left-low;left-high;left-sum/
9elseifright-sumleft-sumandright-sumcross-sum
10return.right-low;right-high;right-sum/
11else return.cross-low;cross-high;cross-sum/

4.1The maximum-subarray problem73
The  initial  call  FIND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY.A;1;A:length/will  find  a  maxi-
mum subarray ofAŒ1 : : n.
Similar to F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY,  the recursive procedure FIND-
M
AXIMUM-SUBARRAYreturns  a  tuple  containing  the  indices  that  demarcate  a
maximum  subarray,  along  with  the  sum  of  the  values  in  a  maximum  subarray.
Line 1 tests for the base case, where the subarray has just one element.  A subar-
ray with just one element has only one subarray—itself—and  so line 2 returns a
tuple with the starting and ending indices of just the one element, along with its
value.  Lines 3–11 handle the recursive case.  Line 3 does the divide part, comput-
ing the indexmidof the midpoint.  Let’s refer to the subarrayAŒlow::midas the
left subarrayand toAŒmidC1::highas theright subarray.  Because we know
that the subarrayAŒlow::highcontains at least two elements, each of the left and
right subarrays must have at least one element.  Lines 4 and 5 conquer by recur-
sively finding maximum subarrays within the left and right subarrays, respectively.
Lines 6–11 form the combine part.  Line 6 finds a maximum subarray that crosses
the midpoint. (Recall that because line 6 solves a subproblem that is not a smaller
instance of the original problem, we consider it to be in the combine part.)  Line 7
tests whether  the left subarray  contains  a subarray  with the maximum sum,  and
line 8 returns that maximum subarray.   Otherwise,  line 9 tests whether the right
subarray contains a subarray with the maximum sum, and line 10 returns that max-
imum subarray. If neither the left nor right subarrays contain a subarray achieving
the maximum sum, then a maximum subarray must cross the midpoint, and line 11
returns it.
Analyzing the divide-and-conquer algorithm
Next we set up a recurrence that describes the running time of the recursive F
IND-
M
AXIMUM-SUBARRAYprocedure.  As we did when we analyzed merge sort in
Section 2.3.2, we make the simplifying assumption that the original problem size
isapowerof2, so that all subproblem sizes are integers.  We denote byT .n/the
running time of F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAYon a subarray ofnelements.  For
starters,  line 1 takes constant time.  The base case,  whennD1, is easy:  line 2
takes constant time, and so
T.1/D‚.1/ :(4.5)
The recursive case occurs whenn>1.  Lines 1 and 3 take constant time.  Each
of the subproblems solved in lines 4 and 5 is on a subarray ofn=2elements (our
assumption that the original problem size is a power of2ensures thatn=2is an
integer),  and so we spendT .n=2/time solving each of them.  Because we have
to solve two subproblems—for  the left subarray  and for the right  subarray—the
contribution to the running time from lines 4 and 5 comes to2T .n=2/. Aswehave

74Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
already seen, the call to FIND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAYin line 6 takes‚.n/
time. Lines 7–11 take only‚.1/time. For the recursive case, therefore, we have
T .n/D‚.1/C2T .n=2/C‚.n/C‚.1/
D2T .n=2/C‚.n/ :(4.6)
Combining  equations  (4.5)  and  (4.6)  gives  us  a  recurrence  for  the  running
timeT .n/of F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY:
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
2T .n=2/C‚.n/ifn>1:
(4.7)
This  recurrence  is  the  same  as  recurrence  (4.1)  for  merge  sort.    As  we  shall
see  from  the  master  method  in  Section  4.5,  this  recurrence  has  the  solution
T .n/D‚.nlgn/.  You might also revisit the recursion tree in Figure 2.5 to un-
derstand why the solution should beT .n/D‚.nlgn/.
Thus,  we  see  that  the  divide-and-conquer  method  yields  an  algorithm  that  is
asymptotically  faster than the brute-force method.  With merge sort and now the
maximum-subarray problem, we begin to get an idea of how powerful the divide-
and-conquer  method  can  be.   Sometimes  it  will  yield  the  asymptotically  fastest
algorithm for a problem, and other times we can do even better. As Exercise 4.1-5
shows, there is in fact a linear-time algorithm for the maximum-subarray problem,
and it does not use divide-and-conquer.
Exercises
4.1-1
What does F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAYreturn when all elements ofAare nega-
tive?
4.1-2
Write pseudocode  for  the brute-force  method of solving  the maximum-subarray
problem. Your procedure should run in‚.n
2
/time.
4.1-3
Implement  both  the  brute-force  and  recursive  algorithms  for  the  maximum-
subarray problem on your own computer. What problem sizen
0
gives the crossover
point  at  which  the  recursive  algorithm  beats  the  brute-force  algorithm?   Then,
change the base case of the recursive algorithm  to use the brute-force  algorithm
whenever the problem size is less thann
0
. Does that change the crossover point?
4.1-4
Suppose we change the definition of the maximum-subarray problem to allow the
result  to be an empty subarray,  where the sum of the values of an empty subar-

4.2Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication75
ray is0.  How would you change any of the algorithms that do not allow empty
subarrays to permit an empty subarray to be the result?
4.1-5
Use the following ideas to develop a nonrecursive,  linear-time algorithm  for the
maximum-subarray problem. Start at the left end of the array, and progress toward
the right, keeping track of the maximum subarray seen so far. Knowing a maximum
subarray ofAŒ1 : : j , extend the answer to find a maximum subarray ending at in-
dexjC1by using the following observation: a maximum subarray ofAŒ1 : : jC1
is either a maximum subarray ofAŒ1 : : j or a subarrayAŒi : : jC1,forsome
1ijC1.   Determine a maximum  subarray  of the formAŒi : : jC1in
constant time based on knowing a maximum subarray ending at indexj.
4.2  Strassen’s algorithm formatrix multiplication
If you have seen matrices before, then you probably know how to multiply them.
(Otherwise,  you  should  read  Section  D.1  in  Appendix  D.)   IfAD.a
ij
/and
BD.b
ij
/are squaren	nmatrices, then in the productCDAB,wedefinethe
entryc
ij
,fori; jD1;2;:::;n,by
c
ij
D
n
X
kD1
a
ik
b
kj
:(4.8)
We must computen
2
matrix entries, and each is the sum ofnvalues. The following
procedure takesn	nmatricesAandBand multiplies them, returning theirn	n
productC.  We assume that each matrix has an attributerows, giving the number
of rows in the matrix.
S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY.A; B/
1nDA:rows
2letCbeanewn	nmatrix
3foriD1ton
4forjD1ton
5c
ij
D0
6forkD1ton
7c
ij
Dc
ij
Ca
ik
b
kj
8returnC
The S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYprocedure works as follows.  Theforloop
of  lines  3–7  computes  the  entries  of  each  rowi,  and  within  a given  rowi,the

76Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
forloop of lines 4–7 computes each of the entriesc
ij
, for each columnj.Line5
initializesc
ij
to0as we start computing the sum given in equation (4.8), and each
iteration of theforloop of lines 6–7 adds in one more term of equation (4.8).
Because each of the triply-nestedforloops runs exactlyniterations, and each
execution of line 7 takes constant time, the S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYproce-
dure takes‚.n
3
/time.
You might at first think that any matrix multiplication algorithm must take.n
3
/
time, since the natural definition of matrix multiplication requires that many mul-
tiplications. You would be incorrect, however: we have a way to multiply matrices
ino.n
3
/time.  In this section, we shall see Strassen’s remarkable recursive algo-
rithm for multiplyingn	nmatrices. It runs in‚.n
lg7
/time, which we shall show
in Section 4.5. Since lg7lies between2:80and2:81, Strassen’s algorithm runs in
O.n
2:81
/time, which is asymptotically better than the simple SQUARE-MAT R I X-
M
ULTIPLYprocedure.
A simple divide-and-conquer algorithm
To keep things simple, when we use a divide-and-conquer  algorithm to compute
the matrix productCDAB, we assume thatnis an exact power of2in each of
then	nmatrices. We make this assumption because in each divide step, we will
dividen	nmatrices into fourn=2	n=2matrices, and by assuming thatnis an
exact power of2, we are guaranteed that as long asn2, the dimensionn=2is an
integer.
Suppose that we partition each ofA,B,andCinto fourn=2	n=2matrices
AD

A
11
A
12
A
21
A
22

;BD

B
11
B
12
B
21
B
22

;CD

C
11
C
12
C
21
C
22

;(4.9)
so that we rewrite the equationCDABas

C
11
C
12
C
21
C
22

D

A
11
A
12
A
21
A
22



B
11
B
12
B
21
B
22

:(4.10)
Equation (4.10) corresponds to the four equations
C
11
DA
11
B
11
CA
12
B
21
;(4.11)
C
12
DA
11
B
12
CA
12
B
22
;(4.12)
C
21
DA
21
B
11
CA
22
B
21
;(4.13)
C
22
DA
21
B
12
CA
22
B
22
:(4.14)
Each of these four equations specifies two multiplications ofn=2	n=2matrices
and the addition of theirn=2	n=2products. We can use these equations to create
a straightforward, recursive, divide-and-conquer algorithm:

4.2Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication77
SQUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A; B/
1nDA:rows
2letCbe a newn	nmatrix
3ifn
==1
4c
11
Da
11
b
11
5elsepartitionA,B,andCas in equations (4.9)
6C
11
DSQUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
11
;B
11
/
CS
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
12
;B
21
/
7C
12
DSQUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
11
;B
12
/
CS
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
12
;B
22
/
8C
21
DSQUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
21
;B
11
/
CS
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
22
;B
21
/
9C
22
DSQUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
21
;B
12
/
CS
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.A
22
;B
22
/
10returnC
This pseudocode glosses over one subtle but important implementation detail.
How do we partition the matrices in line 5? If we were to create12newn=2	n=2
matrices,  we would spend‚.n
2
/time copying entries.  In fact, we can partition
the matrices without copying entries.  The trick is to use index calculations.  We
identify a submatrix by a range of row indices and a range of column indices of
the original matrix.  We end up representing a submatrix a little differently from
how we represent the original matrix, which is the subtlety we are glossing over.
The  advantage  is  that,  since  we  can  specify  submatrices  by  index  calculations,
executing  line  5  takes  only‚.1/time  (although  we  shall  see  that  it  makes  no
difference asymptotically to the overall running time whether we copy or partition
in place).
Now,  we  derive  a  recurrence  to  characterize  the  running  time  of  S
QUARE-
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.LetT .n/be the time to multiply  twon	n
matrices using this procedure.  In the base case, whennD1, we perform just the
one scalar multiplication in line 4, and so
T.1/D‚.1/ :(4.15)
The recursive case occurs whenn>1. As discussed, partitioning the matrices in
line 5 takes‚.1/time, using index calculations.  In lines 6–9, we recursively call
S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEa total of eight times.  Because each
recursive call multiplies twon=2	n=2matrices, thereby contributingT .n=2/to
the overall running time, the time taken by all eight recursive calls is8T .n=2/.We
also must account for the four matrix additions in lines 6–9. Each of these matrices
containsn
2
=4entries, and so each of the four matrix additions takes‚.n
2
/time.
Since the number of matrix additions is a constant, the total time spent adding ma-

78Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
trices in lines 6–9 is‚.n
2
/. (Again, we use index calculations to place the results
of the matrix additions  into the correct positions  of matrixC,  with an overhead
of‚.1/time per entry.) The total time for the recursive case, therefore, is the sum
of the partitioning time, the time for all the recursive calls, and the time to add the
matrices resulting from the recursive calls:
T .n/D‚.1/C8T .n=2/C‚.n
2
/
D8T .n=2/C‚.n
2
/:(4.16)
Notice that if we implemented partitioning by copying matrices, which would cost
‚.n
2
/time, the recurrence would not change, and hence the overall running time
would increase by only a constant factor.
Combining equations (4.15) and (4.16) gives us the recurrence for the running
time of S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE:
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
8T .n=2/C‚.n
2
/ifn>1:
(4.17)
As we shall see from the master method in Section 4.5, recurrence (4.17) has the
solutionT .n/D‚.n
3
/.   Thus,  this  simple  divide-and-conquer  approach  is  no
faster than the straightforward S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYprocedure.
Before we continue on to examining Strassen’s algorithm, let us review where
the components of equation (4.16) came from.  Partitioning eachn	nmatrix by
index calculation takes‚.1/time, but we have two matrices to partition. Although
you could say that partitioning the two matrices takes‚.2/time, the constant of2
is subsumed by the‚-notation.  Adding two matrices,  each with, say,kentries,
takes‚.k/time.   Since the matrices we add each haven
2
=4entries,  you could
say  that  adding  each  pair  takes‚.n
2
=4/time.   Again,  however,  the‚-notation
subsumes  the  constant  factor  of1=4,  and  we say  that  adding  twon
2
=4	n
2
=4
matrices takes‚.n
2
/time.  We have four such matrix additions, and once again,
instead of saying that they take‚.4n
2
/time, we say that they take‚.n
2
/time.
(Of  course,  you  might  observe  that  we could  say  that  the  four  matrix  additions
take‚.4n
2
=4/time, and that4n
2
=4Dn
2
, but the point here is that‚-notation
subsumes constant factors,  whatever they are.)  Thus, we end up with two terms
of‚.n
2
/, which we can combine into one.
When  we account  for  the  eight  recursive  calls,  however,  we cannot  just  sub-
sume the constant factor of8. In other words, we must say that together they take
8T .n=2/time, rather than justT .n=2/time. You can get a feel for why by looking
back at the recursion tree in Figure 2.5, for recurrence (2.1) (which is identical to
recurrence (4.7)), with the recursive caseT .n/D2T .n=2/C‚.n/. The factor of2
determined how many children each tree node had, which in turn determined how
many terms contributed to the sum at each level of the tree.  If we were to ignore

4.2Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication79
the factor of8in equation (4.16) or the factor of2in recurrence (4.1), the recursion
tree would just be linear, rather than “bushy,” and each level would contribute only
one term to the sum.
Bear in mind,  therefore,  that although  asymptotic notation  subsumes constant
multiplicative factors, recursive notation such asT .n=2/does not.
Strassen’s method
The key to Strassen’s method is to make the recursion tree slightly less bushy. That
is,  instead  of performing  eight  recursive  multiplications  ofn=2	n=2matrices,
it performs only seven.  The cost of eliminating one matrix multiplication will be
several new additions ofn=2	n=2matrices, but still only a constant number of
additions.  As before, the constant number of matrix additions will be subsumed
by‚-notation when we set up the recurrence equation to characterize the running
time.
Strassen’s method is not at all obvious.  (This might be the biggest understate-
ment in this book.) It has four steps:
1.  Divide the input matricesAandBand output matrixCinton=2	n=2subma-
trices, as in equation (4.9). This step takes‚.1/time by index calculation, just
as in S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.
2.  Create10matricesS
1
;S
2
;:::;S
10
, each of which isn=2	n=2and is the sum
or difference of two matrices created in step 1. We can create all10matrices in
‚.n
2
/time.
3.  Using the submatrices created in step 1 and the10matrices created in step 2,
recursively compute seven matrix productsP
1
;P
2
;:::;P
7
.  Each matrixP
i
is
n=2	n=2.
4.  Compute the desired submatricesC
11
;C
12
;C
21
;C
22
of the result matrixCby
adding and subtracting various combinations of theP
i
matrices.  We can com-
pute all four submatrices in‚.n
2
/time.
We shall see the details of steps 2–4 in a moment, but we already have enough
information to set up a recurrence for the running time of Strassen’s method. Let us
assume that once the matrix sizengets down to1, we perform a simple scalar mul-
tiplication, just as in line 4 of S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.When
n>1, steps 1, 2, and 4 take a total of‚.n
2
/time, and step 3 requires us to per-
form seven multiplications ofn=2	n=2matrices. Hence, we obtain the following
recurrence for the running timeT .n/of Strassen’s algorithm:
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
7T .n=2/C‚.n
2
/ifn>1:
(4.18)

80Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
We have traded off one matrix multiplication for a constant number of matrix ad-
ditions.  Once we understand recurrences and their solutions, we shall see that this
tradeoff actually leads to a lower asymptotic running time.  By the master method
in Section 4.5, recurrence (4.18) has the solutionT .n/D‚.n
lg7
/.
We now proceed to describe the details.  In step 2, we create the following10
matrices:
S
1
DB
12
B
22
;
S
2
DA
11
CA
12
;
S
3
DA
21
CA
22
;
S
4
DB
21
B
11
;
S
5
DA
11
CA
22
;
S
6
DB
11
CB
22
;
S
7
DA
12
A
22
;
S
8
DB
21
CB
22
;
S
9
DA
11
A
21
;
S
10
DB
11
CB
12
:
Since we must add or subtractn=2	n=2matrices10times, this step does indeed
take‚.n
2
/time.
In step 3, we recursively multiplyn=2	n=2matrices seven times to compute the
followingn=2	n=2matrices, each of which is the sum or difference of products
ofAandBsubmatrices:
P
1
DA
11
S
1
DA
11
B
12
A
11
B
22
;
P
2
DS
2
B
22
DA
11
B
22
CA
12
B
22
;
P
3
DS
3
B
11
DA
21
B
11
CA
22
B
11
;
P
4
DA
22
S
4
DA
22
B
21
A
22
B
11
;
P
5
DS
5
S
6
DA
11
B
11
CA
11
B
22
CA
22
B
11
CA
22
B
22
;
P
6
DS
7
S
8
DA
12
B
21
CA
12
B
22
A
22
B
21
A
22
B
22
;
P
7
DS
9
S
10
DA
11
B
11
CA
11
B
12
A
21
B
11
A
21
B
12
:
Note that the only multiplications we need to perform are those in the middle col-
umn of the above equations. The right-hand column just shows what these products
equal in terms of the original submatrices created in step 1.
Step 4 adds and subtracts theP
i
matrices created in step 3 to construct the four
n=2	n=2submatrices of the productC. We start with
C
11
DP
5
CP
4
P
2
CP
6
:

4.2Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication81
Expanding out the right-hand side, with the expansion of eachP
i
on its own line
and vertically aligning terms that cancel out, we see thatC
11
equals
A
11
B
11
CA
11
B
22
CA
22
B
11
CA
22
B
22
A
22
B
11
CA
22
B
21
A
11
B
22
A
12
B
22
A
22
B
22
A
22
B
21
CA
12
B
22
CA
12
B
21
A
11
B
11
CA
12
B
21
;
which corresponds to equation (4.11).
Similarly, we set
C
12
DP
1
CP
2
;
and soC
12
equals
A
11
B
12
A
11
B
22
CA
11
B
22
CA
12
B
22
A
11
B
12
CA
12
B
22
;
corresponding to equation (4.12).
Setting
C
21
DP
3
CP
4
makesC
21
equal
A
21
B
11
CA
22
B
11
A
22
B
11
CA
22
B
21
A
21
B
11
CA
22
B
21
;
corresponding to equation (4.13).
Finally, we set
C
22
DP
5
CP
1
P
3
P
7
;
so thatC
22
equals
A
11
B
11
CA
11
B
22
CA
22
B
11
CA
22
B
22
A
11
B
22
CA
11
B
12
A
22
B
11
A
21
B
11
A
11
B
11
A
11
B
12
CA
21
B
11
CA
21
B
12
A
22
B
22
CA
21
B
12
;

82Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
which corresponds to equation (4.14).  Altogether, we add or subtractn=2	n=2
matrices eight times in step 4, and so this step indeed takes‚.n
2
/time.
Thus, we see that Strassen’s algorithm, comprising steps 1–4, produces the cor-
rect matrix product and that recurrence (4.18) characterizes its running time. Since
we shall see in Section 4.5 that this recurrence has the solutionT .n/D‚.n
lg7
/,
Strassen’s  method  is  asymptotically  faster  than  the  straightforward  S
QUARE-
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLYprocedure.  The notes at the end of this chapter discuss some
of the practical aspects of Strassen’s algorithm.
Exercises
Note:Although Exercises 4.2-3, 4.2-4, and 4.2-5 are about variants on Strassen’s
algorithm, you should read Section 4.5 before trying to solve them.
4.2-1
Use Strassen’s algorithm to compute the matrix product

13
75

68
42

:
Show your work.
4.2-2
Write pseudocode for Strassen’s algorithm.
4.2-3
How would you modify Strassen’s algorithm to multiplyn	nmatrices in whichn
is not an exact power of2? Show that the resulting algorithm runs in time‚.n
lg7
/.
4.2-4
What is the largestksuch that if you can multiply3	3matrices usingkmulti-
plications (not assuming commutativity of multiplication),  then you can multiply
n	nmatrices in timeo.n
lg7
/? What would the running time of this algorithm be?
4.2-5
V. Pan has discovered a way of multiplying68	68matrices using 132,464 mul-
tiplications, a way of multiplying70	70matrices using 143,640 multiplications,
and a way of multiplying72	72matrices using 155,424 multiplications.  Which
method yields the best asymptotic running time when used in a divide-and-conquer
matrix-multiplication algorithm? How does it compare to Strassen’s algorithm?

4.3The substitution method for solving recurrences83
4.2-6
How quickly can you multiply akn	nmatrix by ann	knmatrix, using Strassen’s
algorithm as a subroutine?  Answer the same question with the order of the input
matrices reversed.
4.2-7
Show how to multiply the complex numbersaCbiandcCdiusing only three
multiplications of real numbers. The algorithm should takea,b,c,anddas input
and produce the real componentacbdand the imaginary componentadCbc
separately.
4.3  The substitution method for solving recurrences
Now that we have seen how recurrences characterize the running times of divide-
and-conquer algorithms, we will learn how to solve recurrences.  We start in this
section with the “substitution” method.
Thesubstitution methodfor solving recurrences comprises two steps:
1.  Guess the form of the solution.
2.  Use mathematical  induction  to find the constants  and show  that  the  solution
works.
We substitute  the guessed  solution for the function  when applying  the inductive
hypothesis to smaller values; hence the name “substitution method.”  This method
is powerful, but we must be able to guess the form of the answer in order to apply it.
We can use the substitution method to establish either upper or lower bounds on
a recurrence. As an example, let us determine an upper bound on the recurrence
T .n/D2T .
b
n=2
c
/Cn;(4.19)
which  is  similar  to  recurrences  (4.3)  and  (4.4).   We  guess  that  the  solution  is
T .n/DO.nlgn/.   The  substitution  method  requires  us  to  prove  thatT .n/
cnlgnfor  an appropriate  choice  of  the constantc>0.   We start  by assuming
that this bound holds for all positivem<n, in particular formD
b
n=2
c
, yielding
T.
b
n=2
c
/c
b
n=2
c
lg.
b
n=2
c
/. Substituting into the recurrence yields
T .n/2.c
b
n=2
c
lg.
b
n=2
c
//Cn
cnlg.n=2/Cn
Dcnlgncnlg2Cn
DcnlgncnCn
cnlgn;

84Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
where the last step holds as long asc1.
Mathematical induction now requires us to show that our solution holds for the
boundary  conditions.   Typically,  we do so by showing  that  the boundary  condi-
tions are suitable as base cases for the inductive proof.  For the recurrence (4.19),
we must show that we can choose the constantclarge enough so that the bound
T .n/cnlgnworks  for  the  boundary  conditions  as  well.    This  requirement
can sometimes lead to problems.   Let us assume,  for the sake of argument,  that
T.1/D1is the sole boundary condition of the recurrence.  Then fornD1,the
boundT .n/cnlgnyieldsT.1/c1lg1D0, which is at odds withT.1/D1.
Consequently, the base case of our inductive proof fails to hold.
We can  overcome  this  obstacle  in proving  an  inductive  hypothesis  for  a  spe-
cific boundary condition with only a little more effort.  In the recurrence  (4.19),
for example, we take advantage of asymptotic notation requiring us only to prove
T .n/cnlgnfornn
0
,wheren
0
is a constantthat  we get  to choose.We
keep the troublesome boundary conditionT.1/D1, but remove it from consid-
eration  in the inductive  proof.   We do so by first observing  that  forn>3,the
recurrence does not depend directly onT.1/.  Thus, we can replaceT.1/byT.2/
andT.3/as the base cases in the inductive proof, lettingn
0
D2.  Note that we
make a distinction between the base case of the recurrence (nD1) and the base
cases of the inductive proof (nD2andnD3).  WithT.1/D1, we derive from
the recurrence thatT.2/D4andT.3/D5.  Now we can complete the inductive
proof thatT .n/cnlgnfor some constantc1by choosingclarge enough
so thatT.2/c2lg2andT.3/c3lg3.  As it turns out, any choice ofc2
suffices for the base cases ofnD2andnD3to hold. For most of the recurrences
we shall examine, it is straightforward to extend boundary conditions to make the
inductive assumption work for smalln, and we shall not always explicitly work out
the details.
Making a good guess
Unfortunately, there is no general way to guess the correct solutions to recurrences.
Guessing  a  solution  takes  experience  and,  occasionally,  creativity.   Fortunately,
though,  you  can  use  some  heuristics  to  help  you  become  a  good  guesser.   You
can also use recursion trees, which we shall see in Section 4.4, to generate good
guesses.
If a recurrence is similar to one you have seen before, then guessing a similar
solution is reasonable. As an example, consider the recurrence
T .n/D2T .
b
n=2
c
C17/Cn;
which looks difficult because of the added “17” in the argument toTon the right-
hand side. Intuitively, however, this additional term cannot substantially affect the

4.3The substitution method for solving recurrences85
solution  to  the  recurrence.   Whennis large,  the  difference  between
b
n=2
c
and
b
n=2
c
C17is not that large:  both cutnnearly evenly in half.  Consequently, we
make the guess thatT .n/DO.nlgn/, which you can verify as correct by using
the substitution method (see Exercise 4.3-6).
Another way to make a good guess is to prove loose upper and lower bounds on
the recurrence and then reduce the range of uncertainty.  For example, we might
start  with  a  lower  bound  ofT .n/D.n/for  the  recurrence  (4.19),  since  we
have  the  termnin  the  recurrence,  and  we  can  prove  an  initial  upper  bound  of
T .n/DO.n
2
/.   Then,  we  can  gradually  lower  the  upper  bound  and  raise  the
lower  bound  until  we  converge  on  the  correct,  asymptotically  tight  solution  of
T .n/D‚.nlgn/.
Subtleties
Sometimes you might correctly  guess an asymptotic  bound on the solution  of a
recurrence, but somehow the math fails to work out in the induction. The problem
frequently  turns out  to be that  the inductive  assumption  is not  strong  enough  to
prove the detailed bound. If you revise the guess by subtracting a lower-order term
when you hit such a snag, the math often goes through.
Consider the recurrence
T .n/DT.
b
n=2
c
/CT.
d
n=2
e
/C1:
We guess that the solution isT .n/DO.n/, and we try to show thatT .n/cnfor
an appropriate choice of the constantc.  Substituting our guess in the recurrence,
we obtain
T .n/c
b
n=2
c
Cc
d
n=2
e
C1
DcnC1;
which does not implyT .n/cnfor any choice ofc. We might be tempted to try
a larger guess, sayT .n/DO.n
2
/. Although we can make this larger guess work,
our original guess ofT .n/DO.n/is correct.  In order to show that it is correct,
however, we must make a stronger inductive hypothesis.
Intuitively,  our  guess  is  nearly  right:   we  are  off  only  by  the  constant1,a
lower-order term.  Nevertheless, mathematical induction does not work unless we
prove  the  exact  form  of  the  inductive  hypothesis.   We  overcome  our  difficulty
bysubtractinga  lower-order  term  from  our  previous  guess.   Our  new  guess  is
T .n/cnd,whered0is a constant. We now have
T .n/.c
b
n=2
c
d/C.c
d
n=2
e
d/C1
Dcn2dC1
cnd;

86Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
as long asd1. As before, we must choose the constantclarge enough to handle
the boundary conditions.
You might find the idea of subtracting a lower-order term counterintuitive.  Af-
ter  all,  if  the  math  does  not  work  out,  we  should  increase  our  guess,  right?
Not necessarily!  When proving an upper bound by induction,  it may actually be
more difficult to prove that a weaker upper bound holds, because in order to prove
the weaker bound, we must use the same weaker bound inductively in the proof.
In our current example, when the recurrence has more than one recursive term, we
get to subtract out the lower-order term of the proposed bound once per recursive
term.  In the above example, we subtracted out the constantdtwice, once for the
T.
b
n=2
c
/term and once for theT.
d
n=2
e
/term.  We ended up with the inequality
T .n/cn2dC1, and it was easy to find values ofdto makecn2dC1be
less than or equal tocnd.
Avoiding pitfalls
It  is  easy  to  err  in  the  use  of  asymptotic  notation.   For  example,  in  the  recur-
rence (4.19) we can falsely “prove”T .n/DO.n/by guessingT .n/cnand
then arguing
T .n/2.c
b
n=2
c
/Cn
cnCn
DO.n/ ;
wrong!!
sincecis a constant.  The error is that we have not proved theexact formof the
inductive hypothesis, that is, thatT .n/cn.  We therefore will explicitly prove
thatT .n/cnwhen we want to show thatT .n/DO.n/.
Changing variables
Sometimes, a little algebraic manipulation can make an unknown recurrence simi-
lar to one you have seen before. As an example, consider the recurrence
T .n/D2T

p
n
 ̆
Clgn;
which looks difficult.  We can simplify this recurrence, though, with a change of
variables.   For convenience,  we shall not  worry about  rounding  off values,  such
as
p
n, to be integers. RenamingmDlgnyields
T.2
m
/D2T .2
m=2
/Cm:
We can now renameS.m/DT.2
m
/to produce the new recurrence
S.m/D2S.m=2/Cm;

4.3The substitution method for solving recurrences87
which is very much like recurrence  (4.19).   Indeed,  this new recurrence  has the
same solution:S.m/DO.mlgm/. Changing back fromS.m/toT .n/, we obtain
T .n/DT.2
m
/DS.m/DO.mlgm/DO.lgnlg lgn/ :
Exercises
4.3-1
Show that the solution ofT .n/DT.n1/CnisO.n
2
/.
4.3-2
Show that the solution ofT .n/DT.
d
n=2
e
/C1isO.lgn/.
4.3-3
We saw that the solution ofT .n/D2T .
b
n=2
c
/CnisO.nlgn/. Show that the so-
lution of this recurrence is also.nlgn/. Conclude that the solution is‚.nlgn/.
4.3-4
Show that by making a different inductive hypothesis, we can overcome the diffi-
culty with the boundary conditionT.1/D1for recurrence (4.19) without adjusting
the boundary conditions for the inductive proof.
4.3-5
Show that‚.nlgn/is the solution to the “exact” recurrence (4.3) for merge sort.
4.3-6
Show that the solution toT .n/D2T .
b
n=2
c
C17/CnisO.nlgn/.
4.3-7
Using  the  master  method  in  Section  4.5,  you  can  show  that  the  solution  to  the
recurrenceT .n/D4T .n=3/CnisT .n/D‚.n
log
3
4
/.  Show that a substitution
proof with the assumptionT .n/cn
log
3
4
fails.  Then show how to subtract off a
lower-order term to make a substitution proof work.
4.3-8
Using  the  master  method  in  Section  4.5,  you  can  show  that  the  solution  to  the
recurrenceT .n/D4T .n=2/Cn
2
isT .n/D‚.n
2
/.  Show that  a substitution
proof  with the assumptionT .n/cn
2
fails.   Then show how to subtract  off a
lower-order term to make a substitution proof work.

88Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
4.3-9
Solve the recurrenceT .n/D3T .
p
n/Clognby making a change of variables.
Your solution should be asymptotically tight.  Do not worry about whether values
are integral.
4.4  The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences
Although  you  can  use  the  substitution  method  to  provide  a  succinct  proof  that
a  solution  to  a recurrence  is  correct,  you  might  have  trouble  coming  up  with  a
good guess.  Drawing out a recursion tree, as we did in our analysis of the merge
sort recurrence in Section 2.3.2, serves as a straightforward way to devise a good
guess.  In arecursion tree, each node represents the cost of a single subproblem
somewhere in the set of recursive function invocations.  We sum the costs within
each level of the tree to obtain a set of per-level  costs,  and then we sum all the
per-level costs to determine the total cost of all levels of the recursion.
A recursion tree is best used to generate a good guess, which you can then verify
by the substitution method. When using a recursion tree to generate a good guess,
you can often tolerate a small amount of “sloppiness,” since you will be verifying
your guess later on. If you are very careful when drawing out a recursion tree and
summing the costs,  however,  you can use a recursion  tree as a direct proof  of a
solution  to a recurrence.   In this section,  we will use recursion  trees to generate
good guesses, and in Section 4.6, we will use recursion trees directly to prove the
theorem that forms the basis of the master method.
For example,  let us see how a recursion  tree would provide a good guess for
the recurrenceT .n/D3T .
b
n=4
c
/C‚.n
2
/.  We start by focusing on finding an
upper bound for the solution. Because we know that floors and ceilings usually do
not matter when solving recurrences (here’s an example of sloppiness that we can
tolerate),  we create a recursion tree for the recurrenceT .n/D3T .n=4/Ccn
2
,
having written out the implied constant coefficientc>0.
Figure 4.5 shows how we derive the recursion tree forT .n/D3T .n=4/Ccn
2
.
For convenience,  we assume  thatnis an exact  power  of4(another  example of
tolerable sloppiness) so that all subproblem sizes are integers. Part (a) of the figure
showsT .n/, which we expand in part (b) into an equivalent tree representing the
recurrence. Thecn
2
term at the root represents the cost at the top level of recursion,
and the three subtrees of the root represent the costs incurred by the subproblems
of sizen=4. Part (c) shows this process carried one step further by expanding each
node with costT .n=4/from part (b). The cost for each of the three children of the
root isc.n=4/
2
.  We continue expanding each node in the tree by breaking it into
its constituent parts as determined by the recurrence.

4.4The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences89
...
...
(d)
(c)(b)(a)
T .n/cn
2
cn
2
cn
2
T

n
4

T

n
4

T

n
4

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

T

n
16

cn
2
c

n
4

2
c

n
4

2
c

n
4

2
c

n
4

2
c

n
4

2
c

n
4

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
c

n
16

2
3
16
cn
2

3
16

2
cn
2
log
4
n
n
log
4
3
T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/T.1/‚.n
log
4
3
/
Total:O.n
2
/
Figure 4.5Constructing  a recursion  tree for  the recurrenceT .n/D3T .n=4/Ccn
2
.Part(a)
showsT .n/, which progressively expands in(b)–(d)to form the recursion tree. The fully expanded
tree in part (d) has height log
4
n(it has log
4
nC1levels).

90Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
Because subproblem sizes decrease by a factor of4each time we go down one
level, we eventually must reach a boundary condition.  How far from the root do
we  reach  one?   The  subproblem  size  for  a  node  at  depthiisn=4
i
.   Thus,  the
subproblem  size hitsnD1whenn=4
i
D1or, equivalently,  wheniDlog
4
n.
Thus, the tree has log
4
nC1levels (at depths0; 1; 2; : : : ;log
4
n).
Next we determine the cost at each level of the tree.  Each level has three times
more  nodes  than  the  level  above,  and  so  the  number  of  nodes  at  depthiis3
i
.
Because  subproblem  sizes  reduce  by  a  factor  of4for  each  level  we  go  down
from  the root,  each  node  at  depthi,foriD0; 1; 2; : : : ;log
4
n1,hasacost
ofc.n=4
i
/
2
.  Multiplying, we see that the total cost over all nodes at depthi,for
iD0; 1; 2; : : : ;log
4
n1,is3
i
c.n=4
i
/
2
D.3=16/
i
cn
2
.   The bottom  level,  at
depth log
4
n,has3
log
4
n
Dn
log
4
3
nodes,  each contributing  costT.1/,  for a total
cost ofn
log
4
3
T.1/,whichis‚.n
log
4
3
/, since we assume thatT.1/is a constant.
Now we add up the costs over all levels to determine the cost for the entire tree:
T .n/Dcn
2
C
3
16
cn
2
C

3
16

2
cn
2
CC

3
16

log
4
n1
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/
D
log
4
n1
X
iD0

3
16

i
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/
D
.3=16/
log
4
n
1
.3=16/1
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/(by equation (A.5)):
This last formula looks somewhat messy until we realize that we can again take
advantage of small amounts of sloppiness and use an infinite decreasing geometric
series as an upper bound.  Backing up one step and applying equation (A.6), we
have
T .n/D
log
4
n1
X
iD0

3
16

i
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/
<
1
X
iD0

3
16

i
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/
D
1
1.3=16/
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/
D
16
13
cn
2
C‚.n
log
4
3
/
DO.n
2
/:
Thus,  we  have  derived  a  guess  ofT .n/DO.n
2
/for  our  original  recurrence
T .n/D3T .
b
n=4
c
/C‚.n
2
/.   In  this  example,  the  coefficients  ofcn
2
form  a
decreasing geometric series and, by equation (A.6), the sum of these coefficients

4.4The recursion-tree method for solving recurrences91
...
...
cn
cn
cn
cn
c

n
3

c

2n
3

c

n
9

c

2n
9

c

2n
9

c

4n
9

log
3=2
n
Total:O.nlgn/
Figure 4.6A recursion tree for the recurrenceT.n/DT .n=3/CT .2n=3/Ccn.
is bounded from above by the constant16=13.  Since the root’s contribution to the
total cost iscn
2
, the root contributes a constant fraction of the total cost.  In other
words, the cost of the root dominates the total cost of the tree.
In fact, ifO.n
2
/is indeed an upper bound for the recurrence (as we shall verify in
a moment), then it must be a tight bound. Why? The first recursive call contributes
acostof‚.n
2
/,andso.n
2
/must be a lower bound for the recurrence.
Now  we  can  use  the  substitution  method  to  verify  that  our  guess  was  cor-
rect,  that  is,T .n/DO.n
2
/is  an  upper  bound  for  the  recurrenceT .n/D
3T .
b
n=4
c
/C‚.n
2
/. We want to show thatT .n/dn
2
for some constantd>0.
Using the same constantc>0as before, we have
T .n/3T .
b
n=4
c
/Ccn
2
3d
b
n=4
c
2
Ccn
2
3d.n=4/
2
Ccn
2
D
3
16
dn
2
Ccn
2
dn
2
;
where the last step holds as long asd.16=13/c.
In another, more intricate, example, Figure 4.6 shows the recursion tree for
T .n/DT .n=3/CT .2n=3/CO.n/ :
(Again,  we omit floor and ceiling functions  for simplicity.)   As before,  we letc
represent the constant factor in theO.n/term. When we add the values across the
levels of the recursion tree shown in the figure, we get a value ofcnfor every level.

92Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
The longest  simple path from the root to a leaf isn!.2=3/n!.2=3/
2
n!
!1.Since.2=3/
k
nD1whenkDlog
3=2
n, the height of the tree is log
3=2
n.
Intuitively,  we expect the solution to the recurrence  to be at most the number
of levels times the cost of each level, orO.cnlog
3=2
n/DO.nlgn/.  Figure 4.6
shows only the top levels of the recursion tree, however, and not every level in the
tree contributes a cost ofcn. Consider the cost of the leaves.  If this recursion tree
were a complete binary tree of height log
3=2
n, there would be2
log
3=2
n
Dn
log
3=2
2
leaves.  Since the cost of each leaf is a constant, the total cost of all leaves would
then  be‚.n
log
3=2
2
/which,  since  log
3=2
2is  a  constant  strictly  greater  than1,
is!.nlgn/.   This recursion  tree is not  a complete  binary  tree,  however,  and so
it has fewer thann
log
3=2
2
leaves.  Moreover,  as we go down from the root, more
and more internal nodes are absent. Consequently, levels toward the bottom of the
recursion tree contribute less thancnto the total cost. We could work out an accu-
rate accounting of all costs, but remember that we are just trying to come up with a
guess to use in the substitution method.  Let us tolerate the sloppiness and attempt
to show that a guess ofO.nlgn/for the upper bound is correct.
Indeed, we can use the substitution method to verify thatO.nlgn/is an upper
bound for the solution to the recurrence. We show thatT .n/dnlgn,wheredis
a suitable positive constant. We have
T .n/T .n=3/CT .2n=3/Ccn
d.n=3/lg.n=3/Cd.2n=3/lg.2n=3/Ccn
D.d.n=3/lgnd.n=3/lg3/
C.d.2n=3/lgnd.2n=3/lg.3=2//Ccn
Ddnlgnd..n=3/lg3C.2n=3/lg.3=2//Ccn
Ddnlgnd..n=3/lg3C.2n=3/lg3.2n=3/lg2/Ccn
Ddnlgndn.lg32=3/
Ccn
dnlgn;
as long asdc=.lg3.2=3//. Thus, we did not need to perform a more accurate
accounting of costs in the recursion tree.
Exercises
4.4-1
Use a recursion tree to determine a good asymptotic upper bound on the recurrence
T .n/D3T .
b
n=2
c
/Cn. Use the substitution method to verify your answer.
4.4-2
Use a recursion tree to determine a good asymptotic upper bound on the recurrence
T
.n/DT.n=2/Cn
2
. Use the substitution method to verify your answer.

4.5The master method for solving recurrences93
4.4-3
Use a recursion tree to determine a good asymptotic upper bound on the recurrence
T .n/D4T .n=2C2/Cn. Use the substitution method to verify your answer.
4.4-4
Use a recursion tree to determine a good asymptotic upper bound on the recurrence
T .n/D2T .n1/C1. Use the substitution method to verify your answer.
4.4-5
Use a recursion tree to determine a good asymptotic upper bound on the recurrence
T .n/DT.n1/CT .n=2/Cn. Use the substitution method to verify your answer.
4.4-6
Argue that the solution to the recurrenceT .n/DT .n=3/CT .2n=3/Ccn,wherec
is a constant, is.nlgn/by appealing to a recursion tree.
4.4-7
Draw the recursion tree forT .n/D4T .
b
n=2
c
/Ccn,wherecis a constant, and
provide a tight asymptotic bound on its solution.  Verify your bound by the substi-
tution method.
4.4-8
Use  a  recursion  tree  to  give  an  asymptotically  tight  solution  to  the  recurrence
T .n/DT.na/CT.a/Ccn,wherea1andc>0are constants.
4.4-9
Use  a  recursion  tree  to  give  an  asymptotically  tight  solution  to  the  recurrence
T .n/DT. ̨n/CT ..1 ̨/n/Ccn,where ̨is a constant in the range0< ̨<1
andc>0is also a constant.
4.5  The master method for solving recurrences
The master method provides a “cookbook” method for solving recurrences of the
form
T .n/DaT .n=b/Cf .n/ ;(4.20)
wherea1andb>1are  constants  andf .n/is  an  asymptotically  positive
function.  To use the master method, you will need to memorize three cases, but
then you will be able to solve many recurrences quite easily, often without pencil
and paper.

94Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
The recurrence (4.20) describes the running time of an algorithm that divides a
problem of sizenintoasubproblems, each of sizen=b,whereaandbare positive
constants.  Theasubproblems are solved recursively,  each in timeT .n=b/.The
functionf .n/encompasses  the cost of dividing the problem  and combining  the
results of the subproblems.   For example,  the recurrence  arising from Strassen’s
algorithm hasaD7,bD2,andf .n/D‚.n
2
/.
As a matter of technical correctness, the recurrence is not actually well defined,
becausen=bmight not be an integer.  Replacing each of theatermsT .n=b/with
eitherT.
b
n=b
c
/orT.
d
n=b
e
/will not affect the asymptotic behavior of the recur-
rence,  however.  (We will prove this assertion in the next section.)  We normally
find it convenient, therefore, to omit the floor and ceiling functions when writing
divide-and-conquer recurrences of this form.
The master theorem
The master method depends on the following theorem.
Theorem 4.1 (Master theorem)
Leta1andb>1be constants, letf .n/be a function, and letT .n/be defined
on the nonnegative integers by the recurrence
T .n/DaT .n=b/Cf .n/ ;
where we interpretn=bto mean either
b
n=b
c
or
d
n=b
e
.ThenT .n/has the follow-
ing asymptotic bounds:
1.   Iff .n/DO.n
log
b
a
/for some constant>0,thenT .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/.
2.   Iff .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/,thenT .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/.
3.   Iff .n/D.n
log
b
aC
/for some constant>0,andifaf .n=b/cf .n/for
some constantc<1and all sufficiently largen,thenT .n/D‚.f .n//.
Before applying  the master theorem  to some examples,  let’s spend a moment
trying  to  understand  what  it  says.   In  each  of  the  three  cases,  we  compare  the
functionf .n/with the functionn
log
b
a
.  Intuitively, the larger of the two functions
determines the solution to the recurrence. If, as in case 1, the functionn
log
b
a
is the
larger, then the solution isT .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/.  If, as in case 3, the functionf .n/
is the larger, then the solution isT .n/D‚.f .n//.  If, as in case 2, the two func-
tions are the same size,  we multiply by a logarithmic  factor,  and the solution is
T .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/D‚.f .n/lgn/.
Beyond this intuition, you need to be aware of some technicalities.  In the first
case, not only mustf .n/be smaller thann
log
b
a
,itmustbepolynomiallysmaller.

4.5The master method for solving recurrences95
That is,f .n/must be asymptotically smaller thann
log
b
a
by a factor ofn

for some
constant>0.  In the third case, not only mustf .n/be larger thann
log
b
a
,italso
must be polynomially larger and in addition satisfy the “regularity” condition that
af .n=b/cf .n/. This condition is satisfied by most of the polynomially bounded
functions that we shall encounter.
Note that  the three cases do not  cover all the possibilities  forf .n/.  There is
a gap between cases 1 and 2 whenf .n/is smaller thann
log
b
a
but not polynomi-
ally smaller.  Similarly, there is a gap between cases 2 and 3 whenf .n/is larger
thann
log
b
a
but not polynomially larger. If the functionf .n/falls into one of these
gaps, or if the regularity condition in case 3 fails to hold, you cannot use the master
method to solve the recurrence.
Using the master method
To use the master method, we simply determine which case (if any) of the master
theorem applies and write down the answer.
As a first example, consider
T .n/D9T .n=3/Cn:
For this recurrence,  we haveaD9,bD3,f .n/Dn,  and thus we have that
n
log
b
a
Dn
log
3
9
D‚.n
2
).  Sincef .n/DO.n
log
3
9
/,whereD1, we can apply
case 1 of the master theorem and conclude that the solution isT .n/D‚.n
2
/.
Now consider
T .n/DT .2n=3/C1;
in whichaD1,bD3=2,f .n/D1,andn
log
b
a
Dn
log
3=2
1
Dn
0
D1.  Case 2
applies, sincef .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/D‚.1/, and thus the solution to the recurrence
isT .n/D‚.lgn/.
For the recurrence
T .n/D3T .n=4/Cnlgn;
we  haveaD3,bD4,f .n/Dnlgn,andn
log
b
a
Dn
log
4
3
DO.n
0:793
/.
Sincef .n/D.n
log
4
3C
/,where0:2,  case 3 applies if we can show that
the  regularity  condition  holds  forf .n/.   For  sufficiently  largen,wehavethat
af .n=b/D3.n=4/lg.n=4/.3=4/nlgnDcf .n/forcD3=4.  Consequently,
by case 3, the solution to the recurrence isT .n/D‚.nlgn/.
The master method does not apply to the recurrence
T .n/D2T .n=2/Cnlgn;
even though it appears to have the proper form:aD2,bD2,f .n/Dnlgn,
andn
log
b
a
Dn.   You  might  mistakenly  think  that  case  3  should  apply,  since

96Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
f .n/Dnlgnis asymptotically  larger thann
log
b
a
Dn.  The problem  is that it
is notpolynomiallylarger.  The ratiof .n/=n
log
b
a
D.nlgn/=nDlgnis asymp-
totically less thann

for any positive constant. Consequently, the recurrence falls
into the gap between case 2 and case 3. (See Exercise 4.6-2 for a solution.)
Let’s  use  the  master  method  to  solve  the  recurrences  we saw  in  Sections  4.1
and 4.2. Recurrence (4.7),
T .n/D2T .n=2/C‚.n/ ;
characterizes the running times of the divide-and-conquer  algorithm for both the
maximum-subarray problem and merge sort.  (As is our practice, we omit stating
the base case in the recurrence.)  Here, we haveaD2,bD2,f .n/D‚.n/,and
thus we have thatn
log
b
a
Dn
log
2
2
Dn. Case 2 applies, sincef .n/D‚.n/,andso
we have the solutionT .n/D‚.nlgn/.
Recurrence (4.17),
T .n/D8T .n=2/C‚.n
2
/;
describes the running time of the first divide-and-conquer  algorithm that we saw
for  matrix  multiplication.   Now  we  haveaD8,bD2,andf .n/D‚.n
2
/,
and son
log
b
a
Dn
log
2
8
Dn
3
.Sincen
3
is polynomially larger thanf .n/(that is,
f .n/DO.n
3
/forD1), case 1 applies, andT .n/D‚.n
3
/.
Finally, consider recurrence (4.18),
T .n/D7T .n=2/C‚.n
2
/;
which describes the running time of Strassen’s algorithm.  Here, we haveaD7,
bD2,f .n/D‚.n
2
/,  and thusn
log
b
a
Dn
log
2
7
.  Rewriting log
2
7as lg7and
recalling that2:80 <lg7<2:81, we see thatf .n/DO.n
lg7
/forD0:8.
Again, case 1 applies, and we have the solutionT .n/D‚.n
lg7
/.
Exercises
4.5-1
Use the master  method to give tight  asymptotic  bounds  for the following  recur-
rences.
a.T .n/D2T .n=4/C1.
b.T .n/D2T .n=4/C
p
n.
c.T .n/D2T .n=4/Cn.
d.T .n/D2T .n=4/Cn
2
.

4.6Proof of the master theorem97
4.5-2
Professor  Caesar  wishes  to  develop  a  matrix-multiplication  algorithm  that  is
asymptotically faster than Strassen’s algorithm.  His algorithm will use the divide-
and-conquer method, dividing each matrix into pieces of sizen=4	n=4,andthe
divide and combine steps together will take‚.n
2
/time.  He needs to determine
how many subproblems his algorithm has to create in order to beat Strassen’s algo-
rithm.  If his algorithm createsasubproblems, then the recurrence for the running
timeT .n/becomesT .n/DaT .n=4/C‚.n
2
/.  What is the largest integer value
ofafor which Professor Caesar’s algorithm would be asymptotically faster than
Strassen’s algorithm?
4.5-3
Use the master method to show that the solution to the binary-search  recurrence
T .n/DT .n=2/C‚.1/isT .n/D‚.lgn/. (See Exercise 2.3-5 for a description
of binary search.)
4.5-4
Can the master method be applied to the recurrenceT .n/D4T .n=2/Cn
2
lgn?
Why or why not? Give an asymptotic upper bound for this recurrence.
4.5-5?
Consider  the  regularity  conditionaf .n=b/cf .n/for  some  constantc<1,
which is part of case 3 of the master theorem. Give an example of constantsa1
andb>1and a functionf .n/that  satisfies all the conditions  in case 3 of the
master theorem except the regularity condition.
?4.6  Proof of the master theorem
This section contains a proof of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1).  You do not
need to understand the proof in order to apply the master theorem.
The  proof  appears  in  two  parts.The  first  part  analyzes  the  master  recur-
rence (4.20),  under  the simplifying  assumption  thatT .n/is defined only on ex-
act powers ofb>1,thatis,fornD1; b; b
2
;:::.  This part gives all the intuition
needed to understand why the master theorem is true. The second part shows how
to extend the analysis to all positive integersn; it applies mathematical technique
to the problem of handling floors and ceilings.
In this section,  we shall sometimes abuse  our asymptotic  notation  slightly  by
using  it  to  describe  the  behavior  of  functions  that  are  defined  only  over  exact
powers  ofb.    Recall  that  the  definitions  of  asymptotic  notations  require  that

98Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
bounds be proved for all sufficiently large numbers,  not just those that are pow-
ers ofb. Since we could make new asymptotic notations that apply only to the set
f
b
i
WiD0; 1; 2; : : :
g
, instead of to the nonnegative numbers, this abuse is minor.
Nevertheless, we must always be on guard when we use asymptotic notation over
a limited domain lest we draw improper conclusions.  For example, proving that
T .n/DO.n/whennis an exact power of2does not guarantee thatT .n/DO.n/.
The functionT .n/could be defined as
T .n/D
(
nifnD1; 2; 4; 8; : : : ;
n
2
otherwise;
in which case the best upper bound that applies to all values ofnisT .n/DO.n
2
/.
Because of this sort of drastic consequence, we shall never use asymptotic notation
over a limited domain without making it absolutely clear from the context that we
are doing so.
4.6.1  The proof for exact powers
The first part of the proof of the master theorem analyzes the recurrence (4.20)
T .n/DaT .n=b/Cf .n/ ;
for the master method, under the assumption thatnis an exact power ofb>1,
wherebneed not be an integer. We break the analysis into three lemmas. The first
reduces the problem of solving the master recurrence to the problem of evaluating
an expression that contains a summation.  The second determines bounds on this
summation.  The third lemma puts the first two together to prove a version of the
master theorem for the case in whichnis an exact power ofb.
Lemma 4.2
Leta1andb>1be constants, and letf .n/be a nonnegative function defined
on exact powers ofb.DefineT .n/on exact powers ofbby the recurrence
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
aT .n=b/Cf .n/ifnDb
i
;
whereiis a positive integer. Then
T .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/C
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j
f .n=b
j
/:(4.21)
ProofWe use the recursion tree in Figure 4.7. The root of the tree has costf .n/,
and it hasachildren, each with costf .n=b/. (It is convenient to think ofaas being

4.6Proof of the master theorem99
...
...
...
.........
...
.........
...
.........
...
f .n/
f .n/
aaa
a
aaa
a
aaa
a
a
f .n=b/f .n=b/f .n=b/
f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/f .n=b
2
/
af .n=b/
a
2
f .n=b
2
/
log
b
n
n
log
b
a
‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.n
log
b
a
/
Total:‚.n
log
b
a
/C
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j
f .n=b
j
/
Figure 4.7The recursion tree generated byT .n/DaT .n=b/Cf .n/. The tree is a completea-ary
tree withn
log
b
a
leaves and height log
b
n. The cost of the nodes at each depth is shown at the right,
and their sum is given in equation (4.21).
an integer, especially when visualizing the recursion tree, but the mathematics does
not require it.) Each of these children hasachildren, makinga
2
nodes at depth 2,
and each of theachildren  has costf .n=b
2
/.   In general,  there  area
j
nodes  at
depthj, and each has costf .n=b
j
/.  The cost of each leaf isT.1/D‚.1/,and
each leaf is at depth log
b
n,sincen=b
log
b
n
D1.Therearea
log
b
n
Dn
log
b
a
leaves
in the tree.
We can obtain equation (4.21) by summing the costs of the nodes at each depth
in the tree,  as shown in the figure.  The cost for all internal nodes at depthjis
a
j
f .n=b
j
/, and so the total cost of all internal nodes is
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j
f .n=b
j
/:
In the underlying divide-and-conquer  algorithm,  this sum represents the costs of
dividing problems into subproblems and then recombining the subproblems.  The

100Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
cost of all the leaves, which is the cost of doing alln
log
b
a
subproblems of size1,
is‚.n
log
b
a
/.
In terms of the recursion tree, the three cases of the master theorem correspond
to  cases  in  which  the  total  cost  of the  tree  is  (1)  dominated  by  the  costs  in  the
leaves, (2) evenly distributed among the levels of the tree, or (3) dominated by the
cost of the root.
The summation in equation (4.21) describes the cost of the dividing and com-
bining steps in the underlying divide-and-conquer algorithm. The next lemma pro-
vides asymptotic bounds on the summation’s growth.
Lemma 4.3
Leta1andb>1be constants, and letf .n/be a nonnegative function defined
on exact powers ofb. A functiong.n/defined over exact powers ofbby
g.n/D
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j
f .n=b
j
/(4.22)
has the following asymptotic bounds for exact powers ofb:
1.   Iff .n/DO.n
log
b
a
/for some constant>0,theng.n/DO.n
log
b
a
/.
2.   Iff .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/,theng.n/D‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/.
3.   Ifaf .n=b/cf .n/for some constantc<1and for all sufficiently largen,
theng.n/D‚.f .n//.
ProofFor case 1, we havef .n/DO.n
log
b
a
/, which implies thatf .n=b
j
/D
O..n=b
j
/
log
b
a
/. Substituting into equation (4.22) yields
g.n/DO
 
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j

n
b
j

log
b
a
!
:(4.23)
We bound the summation within theO-notation by factoring out terms and simpli-
fying, which leaves an increasing geometric series:
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j

n
b
j

log
b
a
Dn
log
b
a
log
b
n1
X
jD0

ab

b
log
b
a

j
Dn
log
b
a
log
b
n1
X
jD0
.b

/
j
Dn
log
b
a

b
log
b
n
1
b

1


4.6Proof of the master theorem101
Dn
log
b
a

n

1
b

1

:
Sincebandare constants, we can rewrite the last expression asn
log
b
a
O.n

/D
O.n
log
b
a
/. Substituting this expression for the summation in equation (4.23) yields
g.n/DO.n
log
b
a
/;
thereby proving case 1.
Because  case  2  assumes  thatf .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/,wehavethatf .n=b
j
/D
‚..n=b
j
/
log
b
a
/. Substituting into equation (4.22) yields
g.n/D‚
 
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j

n
b
j

log
b
a
!
:(4.24)
We bound the summation within the‚-notation as in case 1, but this time we do not
obtain a geometric series.  Instead, we discover that every term of the summation
is the same:
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j

n
b
j

log
b
a
Dn
log
b
a
log
b
n1
X
jD0

a
b
log
b
a

j
Dn
log
b
a
log
b
n1
X
jD0
1
Dn
log
b
a
log
b
n:
Substituting this expression for the summation in equation (4.24) yields
g.n/D‚.n
log
b
a
log
b
n/
D‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/ ;
proving case 2.
We prove case 3 similarly.  Sincef .n/appears in the definition (4.22) ofg.n/
and all terms ofg.n/are nonnegative, we can conclude thatg.n/D.f .n//for
exact powers ofb. We assume in the statement of the lemma thataf .n=b/cf .n/
for some constantc<1and all sufficiently largen.  We rewrite this assumption
asf .n=b/.c=a/f .n/and iteratejtimes, yieldingf .n=b
j
/.c=a/
j
f .n/or,
equivalently,a
j
f .n=b
j
/c
j
f .n/, where we assume that the values we iterate
on are sufficiently large.  Since the last, and smallest, such value isn=b
j1
,itis
enough to assume thatn=b
j1
is sufficiently large.
Substituting into equation (4.22) and simplifying yields a geometric series, but
unlike the series in case 1, this one has decreasing terms.  We use anO.1/term to

102Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
capture the terms that are not covered by our assumption thatnis sufficiently large:
g.n/D
log
b
n1
X
jD0
a
j
f .n=b
j
/

log
b
n1
X
jD0
c
j
f .n/CO.1/
f .n/
1
X
jD0
c
j
CO.1/
Df .n/

1
1c

CO.1/
DO.f .n// ;
sincecis a constant. Thus, we can conclude thatg.n/D‚.f .n//for exact powers
ofb. With case 3 proved, the proof of the lemma is complete.
We can now prove a version of the master theorem for the case in whichnis an
exact power ofb.
Lemma 4.4
Leta1andb>1be constants, and letf .n/be a nonnegative function defined
on exact powers ofb.DefineT .n/on exact powers ofbby the recurrence
T .n/D
(
‚.1/ifnD1;
aT .n=b/Cf .n/ifnDb
i
;
whereiis a positive integer.  ThenT .n/has the following asymptotic bounds for
exact powers ofb:
1.   Iff .n/DO.n
log
b
a
/for some constant>0,thenT .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/.
2.   Iff .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/,thenT .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/.
3.   Iff .n/D.n
log
b
aC
/for some constant>0,andifaf .n=b/cf .n/for
some constantc<1and all sufficiently largen,thenT .n/D‚.f .n//.
ProofWe use the bounds in Lemma 4.3 to evaluate the summation (4.21) from
Lemma 4.2. For case 1, we have
T .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/CO.n
log
b
a
/
D‚.n
log
b
a
/;

4.6Proof of the master theorem103
and for case 2,
T .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/C‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/
D‚.n
log
b
a
lgn/ :
For case 3,
T .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/C‚.f .n//
D‚.f .n// ;
becausef .n/D.n
log
b
aC
/.
4.6.2  Floors and ceilings
To complete the proof of the master theorem, we must now extend our analysis to
the situation in which floors and ceilings appear in the master recurrence, so that
the recurrence is defined for all integers, not for just exact powers ofb. Obtaining
a lower bound on
T .n/DaT .
d
n=b
e
/Cf .n/(4.25)
and an upper bound on
T .n/DaT .
b
n=b
c
/Cf .n/(4.26)
is routine, since we can push through the bound
d
n=b
e
n=bin the first case to
yield the desired result, and we can push through the bound
b
n=b
c
n=bin the
second case. We use much the same technique to lower-bound the recurrence (4.26)
as to upper-bound  the recurrence  (4.25),  and so we shall present  only this latter
bound.
We modify the recursion tree of Figure 4.7 to produce the recursion tree in Fig-
ure 4.8.  As we go down in the recursion tree, we obtain a sequence of recursive
invocations on the arguments
n;
d
n=b
e
;
dd
n=b
e
=b
e
;
ddd
n=b
e
=b
e
=b
e
;
:
:
:
Let us denote thejth element in the sequence byn
j
,where
n
j
D
(
nifjD0;
d
n
j1
=b
e
ifj>0:
(4.27)

104Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
...
...
...
.........
...
.........
...
.........
...
f .n/
f .n/
aaa
a
aaa
a
aaa
a
a
f.n
1
/f.n
1
/f.n
1
/
f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/f.n
2
/
af . n
1
/
a
2
f.n
2
/
b
log
b
n
c
‚.n
log
b
a
/
‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.1/‚.n
log
b
a
/
Total:‚.n
log
b
a
/C
blog
b
nc1
X
jD0
a
j
f.n
j
/
Figure 4.8The recursion tree generated byT .n/DaT .
d
n=b
e
/Cf .n/. The recursive argumentn
j
is given by equation (4.27).
Our first goal is to determine  the depthksuch thatn
k
is a constant.   Using the
inequality
d
x
e
xC1, we obtain
n
0
n;
n
1

n
b
C1;
n
2

n
b
2
C
1
b
C1;
n
3

n
b
3
C
1
b
2
C
1
b
C1;
:
:
:
In general, we have

4.6Proof of the master theorem105
n
j

n
b
j
C
j1
X
iD0
1
b
i
<
n
b
j
C
1
X
iD0
1
b
i
D
n
b
j
C
b
b1
:
LettingjD
b
log
b
n
c
, we obtain
n
blog
b
nc
<
n
b
blog
b
nc
C
b
b1
<
n
b
log
b
n1
C
b
b1
D
n
n=b
C
b
b1
DbC
b
b1
DO.1/ ;
and thus we see that at depth
b
log
b
n
c
, the problem size is at most a constant.
From Figure 4.8, we see that
T .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/C
blog
b
nc1
X
jD0
a
j
f.n
j
/;(4.28)
which is much the same as equation (4.21), except thatnis an arbitrary integer and
not restricted to be an exact power ofb.
We can now evaluate the summation
g.n/D
blog
b
nc1
X
jD0
a
j
f.n
j
/(4.29)
from equation (4.28) in a manner analogous to the proof of Lemma 4.3. Beginning
with case 3, ifaf .
d
n=b
e
/cf .n/forn>bCb=.b1/,wherec<1is a constant,
then it follows thata
j
f.n
j
/c
j
f .n/.  Therefore,  we can evaluate the sum in
equation (4.29) just as in Lemma 4.3. For case 2, we havef .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
/.Ifwe
can show thatf.n
j
/DO.n
log
b
a
=a
j
/DO..n=b
j
/
log
b
a
/, then the proof for case 2
of Lemma 4.3 will go through. Observe thatj
b
log
b
n
c
impliesb
j
=n1.The
boundf .n/DO.n
log
b
a
/implies that there exists a constantc>0such that for all
sufficiently largen
j
,

106Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
f.n
j
/c

n
b
j
C
b
b1

log
b
a
Dc

n
b
j

1C
b
j
n

b
b1

log
b
a
Dc

n
log
b
a
a
j

1C

b
j
n

b
b1

log
b
a
c

n
log
b
a
a
j

1C
b
b1

log
b
a
DO

n
log
b
a
a
j

;
sincec.1Cb=.b1//
log
b
a
is a constant. Thus, we have proved case 2. The proof
of case 1 is almost identical.  The key is to prove the boundf.n
j
/DO.n
log
b
a
/,
which is similar to the corresponding proof of case 2, though the algebra is more
intricate.
We have now proved the upper bounds in the master theorem for all integersn.
The proof of the lower bounds is similar.
Exercises
4.6-1?
Give a simple and exact expression forn
j
in equation (4.27) for the case in whichb
is a positive integer instead of an arbitrary real number.
4.6-2?
Show that iff .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
lg
k
n/,wherek0, then the master recurrence has
solutionT .n/D‚.n
log
b
a
lg
kC1
n/.  For simplicity, confine your analysis to exact
powers ofb.
4.6-3?
Show that case 3 of the master theorem is overstated, in the sense that the regularity
conditionaf .n=b/cf .n/for some constantc<1implies that there exists a
constant>0such thatf .n/D.n
log
b
aC
/.

Problems for Chapter 4107
Problems
4-1  Recurrence examples
Give asymptotic upper and lower bounds forT .n/in each of the following recur-
rences.  Assume thatT .n/is constant forn2.  Make your bounds as tight as
possible, and justify your answers.
a.T .n/D2T .n=2/Cn
4
.
b.T .n/DT .7n=10/Cn.
c.T .n/D16T .n=4/Cn
2
.
d.T .n/D7T .n=3/Cn
2
.
e.T .n/D7T .n=2/Cn
2
.
f.T .n/D2T .n=4/C
p
n.
g.T .n/DT.n2/Cn
2
.
4-2  Parameter-passing costs
Throughout  this book,  we assume that parameter passing during procedure calls
takes constant time, even if anN-element array is being passed.  This assumption
is valid in most systems because a pointer to the array is passed, not the array itself.
This problem examines the implications of three parameter-passing strategies:
1.  An array is passed by pointer. TimeD‚.1/.
2.  An array is passed by copying. TimeD‚.N /,whereNis the size of the array.
3.  An array is passed by copying only the subrange that might be accessed by the
called procedure. TimeD‚.qpC1/if the subarrayAŒp : : qis passed.
a.Consider the recursive binary search algorithm for finding a number in a sorted
array (see Exercise 2.3-5).  Give recurrences for the worst-case running times
of binary search when arrays are passed using each of the three methods above,
and give good upper bounds on the solutions of the recurrences.  LetNbe the
size of the original problem andnbe the size of a subproblem.
b.Redo part (a) for the M
ERGE-SORTalgorithm from Section 2.3.1.

108Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
4-3  More recurrence examples
Give asymptotic upper and lower bounds forT .n/in each of the following recur-
rences.  Assume thatT .n/is constant for sufficiently smalln.  Make your bounds
as tight as possible, and justify your answers.
a.T .n/D4T .n=3/Cnlgn.
b.T .n/D3T .n=3/Cn=lgn.
c.T .n/D4T .n=2/Cn
2
p
n.
d.T .n/D3T .n=32/Cn=2.
e.T .n/D2T .n=2/Cn=lgn.
f.T .n/DT .n=2/CT .n=4/CT .n=8/Cn.
g.T .n/DT.n1/C1=n.
h.T .n/DT.n1/Clgn.
i.T .n/DT.n2/C1=lgn.
j.T .n/D
p
nT .
p
n/Cn.
4-4  Fibonacci numbers
This  problem  develops  properties  of  the  Fibonacci  numbers,  which  are  defined
by recurrence (3.22).  We shall use the technique of generating functions to solve
the Fibonacci  recurrence.   Define thegenerating function(orformal power se-
ries)Fas
F. ́/D
1
X
iD0
F
i
 ́
i
D0C ́C ́
2
C2 ́
3
C3 ́
4
C5 ́
5
C8 ́
6
C13 ́
7
C21 ́
8
C;
whereF
i
is theith Fibonacci number.
a.Show thatF. ́/D ́C ́F. ́/C ́
2
F. ́/.

Problems for Chapter 4109
b.Show that
F. ́/D
 ́
1 ́ ́
2
D
 ́
.1 ́/.1
y
 ́/
D
1
p
5

1
1 ́

1
1
y
 ́

;
where
D
1C
p
5
2
D1:61803 : : :
and
y
D
1
p
5
2
D0:61803 : : :  :
c.Show that
F. ́/D
1
X
iD0
1
p
5
.
i

y

i
/ ́
i
:
d.Use part (c) to prove thatF
i
D
i
=
p
5fori>0, rounded to the nearest integer.
(Hint:Observe that
ˇ
ˇ
y

ˇ
ˇ
<1.)
4-5  Chip testing
Professor Diogenes hasnsupposedly identical integrated-circuit chips that in prin-
ciple are capable of testing each other. The professor’s test jig accommodates two
chips at a time. When the jig is loaded, each chip tests the other and reports whether
it is good or bad.  A good chip always reports accurately whether the other chip is
good or bad, but the professor cannot trust the answer of a bad chip. Thus, the four
possible outcomes of a test are as follows:
ChipAsaysChipBsaysConclusion
Bis goodAis goodboth are good, or both are bad
Bis goodAis badat least one is bad
Bis badAis goodat least one is bad
Bis badAis badat least one is bad
a.Show that if more thann=2chips are bad, the professor cannot necessarily de-
termine which chips are good using any strategy based on this kind of pairwise
test. Assume that the bad chips can conspire to fool the professor.

110Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
b.Consider the problem of finding a single good chip from amongnchips,  as-
suming that more thann=2of the chips are good.  Show that
b
n=2
c
pairwise
tests are sufficient to reduce the problem to one of nearly half the size.
c.Show that the good chips can be identified with‚.n/pairwise tests, assuming
that more thann=2of the chips are good.  Give and solve the recurrence that
describes the number of tests.
4-6  Monge arrays
Anm	narrayAof real numbers is aMonge arrayif for alli,j,k,andlsuch
that1i<kmand1j<ln,wehave
AŒi; j CAŒk; l AŒi; l CAŒk; j  :
In other words, whenever we pick two rows and two columns of a Monge array and
consider the four elements at the intersections of the rows and the columns, the sum
of the upper-left and lower-right elements is less than or equal to the sum of the
lower-left and upper-right elements. For example, the following array is Monge:
10   17   13   28   23
17   22   16   29   23
24   28   22   34   24
11   136177
45   44   32   37   23
36   33   19   216
75   66   51   53   34
a.Prove  that  an  array  is  Monge  if  and  only  if  for  alliD1; 2; :::; m1and
jD1; 2; :::; n1,wehave
AŒi; j CAŒiC1; jC1AŒi; jC1CAŒiC1; j  :
(Hint:For the “if” part, use induction separately on rows and columns.)
b.The following  array is not  Monge.   Change  one element  in order  to make it
Monge. (Hint:Use part (a).)
37   23   22   32
216710
53   34   30   31
32   1396
43   21   158

Notes for Chapter 4111
c.Letf.i/be the index of the column containing the leftmost minimum element
of rowi. Prove thatf.1/f.2/f.m/for anym	nMonge array.
d.Here is a description of a divide-and-conquer algorithm that computes the left-
most minimum element in each row of anm	nMonge arrayA:
Construct a submatrixA
0
ofAconsisting of the even-numbered rows ofA.
Recursively determine the leftmost minimum for each row ofA
0
.Then
compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows ofA.
Explain how to compute the leftmost minimum in the odd-numbered rows ofA
(given  that  the  leftmost  minimum  of  the  even-numbered  rows  is  known)  in
O.mCn/time.
e.Write the recurrence describing the running time of the algorithm described in
part (d). Show that its solution isO.mCnlogm/.
Chapter notes
Divide-and-conquer as a technique for designing algorithms dates back to at least
1962 in an article by Karatsuba and Ofman [194]. It might have been used well be-
fore then, however; according to Heideman, Johnson, and Burrus [163], C. F. Gauss
devised the first fast Fourier transform algorithm in 1805, and Gauss’s formulation
breaks the problem into smaller subproblems whose solutions are combined.
The maximum-subarray problem in Section 4.1 is a minor variation on a problem
studied by Bentley [43, Chapter 7].
Strassen’s  algorithm  [325]  caused  much  excitement  when  it  was  published
in 1969.  Before then, few imagined the possibility of an algorithm asymptotically
faster  than  the  basic  S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYprocedure.   The  asymptotic
upper  bound for matrix multiplication  has been improved since then.   The most
asymptotically efficient algorithm for multiplyingn	nmatrices to date, due to
Coppersmith and Winograd [78], has a running time ofO.n
2:376
/. The best lower
bound known is just the obvious.n
2
/bound (obvious because we must fill inn
2
elements of the product matrix).
From a practical point of view, Strassen’s algorithm is often not the method of
choice for matrix multiplication, for four reasons:
1.  The  constant  factor  hidden  in  the‚.n
lg7
/running  time  of  Strassen’s  algo-
rithm is larger than the constant factor in the‚.n
3
/-time SQUARE-MAT R I X-
M
ULTIPLYprocedure.
2.  When the matrices are sparse, methods tailored for sparse matrices are faster.

112Chapter 4Divide-and-Conquer
3.   Strassen’s algorithm is not quite as numerically stable as SQUARE-MAT R I X-
M
ULTIPLY. In other words, because of the limited precision of computer arith-
metic  on noninteger  values,  larger  errors  accumulate  in Strassen’s  algorithm
than in S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY.
4.   The submatrices formed at the levels of recursion consume space.
The latter two reasons were mitigated around 1990.  Higham [167] demonstrated
that  the  difference  in  numerical  stability  had  been  overemphasized;   although
Strassen’s algorithm is too numerically unstable for some applications, it is within
acceptable limits for others.  Bailey, Lee, and Simon [32] discuss techniques for
reducing the memory requirements for Strassen’s algorithm.
In practice,  fast matrix-multiplication  implementations  for dense matrices use
Strassen’s algorithm  for matrix sizes above a “crossover point,”  and they switch
to  a  simpler  method  once  the  subproblem  size  reduces  to  below  the  crossover
point. The exact value of the crossover point is highly system dependent. Analyses
that count operations but ignore effects from caches and pipelining have produced
crossover points as low asnD8(by Higham [167]) ornD12(by Huss-Lederman
et al. [186]).  D’Alberto and Nicolau [81] developed an adaptive scheme,  which
determines the crossover point by benchmarking  when their software package is
installed.  They found crossover points on various systems ranging fromnD400
tonD2150, and they could not find a crossover point on a couple of systems.
Recurrences were studied as early as 1202 by L. Fibonacci,  for whom the Fi-
bonacci numbers are named.  A. De Moivre introduced the method of generating
functions (see Problem 4-4) for solving recurrences. The master method is adapted
from Bentley, Haken, and Saxe [44], which provides the extended method justified
by Exercise 4.6-2. Knuth [209] and Liu [237] show how to solve linear recurrences
using the method of generating functions.  Purdom and Brown [287] and Graham,
Knuth, and Patashnik [152] contain extended discussions of recurrence solving.
Several researchers, including Akra and Bazzi [13], Roura [299], Verma [346],
and Yap [360], have given methods for solving more general divide-and-conquer
recurrences than are solved by the master method.  We describe the result of Akra
and Bazzi here, as modified by Leighton [228]. The Akra-Bazzi method works for
recurrences of the form
T.x/D
(
‚.1/if1xx
0
;
P
k
iD1
a
i
T.b
i
x/Cf.x/ifx>x
0
;
(4.30)
where

x1is a real number,

x
0
is a constant such thatx
0
1=b
i
andx
0
1=.1b
i
/foriD1;2;:::;k,

a
i
is a positive constant foriD1;2;:::;k,

Notes for Chapter 4113

b
i
is a constant in the range0<b
i
<1foriD1;2;:::;k,

k1is an integer constant, and

f.x/is  a  nonnegative  function  that  satisfies  thepolynomial-growth condi-
tion:   there  exist  positive  constantsc
1
andc
2
such  that  for  allx1,for
iD1;2;:::;k,  and for  allusuch  thatb
i
xux,wehavec
1
f.x/
f.u/c
2
f.x/.  (If
j
f
0
.x/
j
is upper-bounded by some polynomial inx,then
f.x/satisfies the polynomial-growth condition. For example,f.x/Dx
 ̨
lg
ˇ
x
satisfies this condition for any real constants ̨andˇ.)
Although  the  master  method  does  not  apply  to  a  recurrence  such  asT .n/D
T.
b
n=3
c
/CT.
b
2n=3
c
/CO.n/, the Akra-Bazzi method does.  To solve the re-
currence (4.30), we first find the unique real numberpsuch that
P
k
iD1
a
i
b
p
i
D1.
(Such apalways exists.) The solution to the recurrence is then
T .n/D‚

x
p

1C
Z
x
1
f.u/
u
pC1
du

:
The Akra-Bazzi method can be somewhat difficult to use, but it serves in solving
recurrences that model division of the problem into substantially unequally sized
subproblems.  The master method is simpler to use, but it applies only when sub-
problem sizes are equal.

5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized
Algorithms
This chapter introduces probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms.  If you
are unfamiliar with the basics of probability theory, you should read Appendix C,
which reviews this material. We shall revisit probabilistic analysis and randomized
algorithms several times throughout this book.
5.1  The hiring problem
Suppose that you need to hire a new office assistant.   Your previous  attempts at
hiring have been unsuccessful, and you decide to use an employment agency.  The
employment agency sends you one candidate each day.  You interview that person
and then decide either to hire that person or not.  You must pay the employment
agency a small fee to interview an applicant.  To actually hire an applicant is more
costly, however, since you must fire your current office assistant and pay a substan-
tial hiring fee to the employment agency. You are committed to having, at all times,
the best possible person for the job.  Therefore, you decide that, after interviewing
each applicant, if that applicant is better qualified than the current office assistant,
you will fire the current office assistant and hire the new applicant. You are willing
to pay the resulting price of this strategy, but you wish to estimate what that price
will be.
The procedure H
IRE-ASSISTANT, given below, expresses this strategy for hiring
in pseudocode.  It assumes that the candidates for the office assistant job are num-
bered1throughn. The procedure assumes that you are able to, after interviewing
candidatei, determine whether candidateiis the best candidate you have seen so
far.  To initialize, the procedure creates a dummy candidate, numbered 0, who is
less qualified than each of the other candidates.

5.1The hiring problem115
HIRE-ASSISTANT.n/
1bestD0//candidate 0 is a least-qualified dummy candidate
2foriD1ton
3interview candidatei
4ifcandidateiis better than candidatebest
5bestDi
6hire candidatei
The cost model for this problem differs from the model described in Chapter 2.
We focus not on the running time of H
IRE-ASSISTANT,  but instead on the costs
incurred by interviewing and hiring. On the surface, analyzing the cost of this algo-
rithm may seem very different from analyzing the running time of, say, merge sort.
The analytical techniques used, however, are identical whether we are analyzing
cost or running time.  In either case, we are counting the number of times certain
basic operations are executed.
Interviewing has a low cost, sayc
i
, whereas hiring is expensive, costingc
h
.Let-
tingmbe the number of people hired, the total cost associated with this algorithm
isO.c
i
nCc
h
m/.  No matter how many people we hire,  we always interviewn
candidates  and thus always incur the costc
i
nassociated  with interviewing.   We
therefore concentrate on analyzingc
h
m, the hiring cost.  This quantity varies with
each run of the algorithm.
This scenario serves as a model for a common computational paradigm. We of-
ten need to find the maximum or minimum value in a sequence by examining each
element of the sequence and maintaining a current “winner.”  The hiring problem
models how often we update our notion of which element is currently winning.
Worst-case analysis
In the worst case, we actually hire every candidate that we interview. This situation
occurs if the candidates come in strictly increasing order of quality, in which case
we hirentimes, for a total hiring cost ofO.c
h
n/.
Of course, the candidates do not always come in increasing order of quality.  In
fact,  we have no idea about  the order in which they arrive,  nor do we have any
control over this order.  Therefore, it is natural to ask what we expect to happen in
a typical or average case.
Probabilistic analysis
Probabilistic analysisis the use of probability in the analysis of problems.  Most
commonly, we use probabilistic analysis to analyze the running time of an algo-
rithm.   Sometimes we use it to analyze  other  quantities,  such  as the hiring  cost

116Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
in procedure  HIRE-ASSISTANT.  In order to perform a probabilistic analysis, we
must use knowledge of, or make assumptions about, the distribution of the inputs.
Then we analyze our algorithm, computing an average-case running time, where
we take the average over the distribution of the possible inputs.  Thus we are, in
effect, averaging the running time over all possible inputs.  When reporting such a
running time, we will refer to it as theaverage-case running time.
We must  be very  careful  in deciding  on the  distribution  of  inputs.   For some
problems, we may reasonably assume something about the set of all possible in-
puts,  and then we can use probabilistic  analysis as a technique  for designing  an
efficient algorithm and as a means for gaining insight into a problem.  For other
problems,  we cannot describe a reasonable input distribution,  and in these cases
we cannot use probabilistic analysis.
For the hiring problem,  we can assume that the applicants  come in a random
order.  What does that mean for this problem?  We assume that we can compare
any  two  candidates  and  decide  which  one  is  better  qualified;  that  is,  there  is  a
total  order  on  the candidates.   (See Appendix  B  for  the  definition  of  a total  or-
der.)  Thus, we can rank each candidate with a unique number from1throughn,
usingrank.i /to denote the rank of applicanti,  and adopt the convention  that a
higher rank corresponds to a better qualified applicant.  The ordered listhrank.1/;
rank.2/;:::;rank.n/iis a permutation  of the listh1; 2; :::; ni.  Saying that the
applicants come in a random order is equivalent to saying that this list of ranks is
equally likely to be any one of thenŠpermutations of the numbers1throughn.
Alternatively, we say that the ranks form auniform random permutation;thatis,
each of the possiblenŠpermutations appears with equal probability.
Section 5.2 contains a probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem.
Randomized algorithms
In order to use probabilistic analysis, we need to know something about the distri-
bution of the inputs. In many cases, we know very little about the input distribution.
Even if we do know something about the distribution, we may not be able to model
this knowledge computationally. Yet we often can use probability and randomness
as a tool for algorithm design and analysis, by making the behavior of part of the
algorithm random.
In the hiring problem, it may seem as if the candidates are being presented to us
in a random order, but we have no way of knowing whether or not they really are.
Thus, in order to develop a randomized algorithm for the hiring problem, we must
have greater control over the order in which we interview the candidates. We will,
therefore,  change the model slightly.  We say that the employment agency hasn
candidates, and they send us a list of the candidates in advance.  On each day, we
choose, randomly, which candidate to interview. Although we know nothing about

5.1The hiring problem117
the candidates (besides their names), we have made a significant change.  Instead
of relying on a guess that the candidates come to us in a random order, we have
instead gained control of the process and enforced a random order.
More generally, we call an algorithmrandomizedif its behavior is determined
not  only  by its  input  but  also  by values  produced  by arandom-number gener-
ator.  We shall assume that we have at our disposal  a random-number  generator
R
ANDOM.  A call to  RANDOM.a; b/returns an integer betweenaandb,inclu-
sive,  with each  such  integer  being  equally  likely.   For example,  R
ANDOM.0; 1/
produces0with probability1=2, and it produces1with probability1=2. A call to
R
ANDOM.3; 7/returns either3,4,5,6,or7, each with probability1=5. Each inte-
ger returned by R
ANDOMis independent of the integers returned on previous calls.
You may imagine R
ANDOMas rolling a.baC1/-sided die to obtain its out-
put. (In practice, most programming environments offer apseudorandom-number
generator:  a  deterministic  algorithm  returning  numbers  that  “look”  statistically
random.)
When analyzing the running time of a randomized algorithm, we take the expec-
tation of the running time over the distribution of values returned by the random
number generator.  We distinguish these algorithms from those in which the input
is random by referring to the running time of a randomized algorithm  as anex-
pected running time.  In general, we discuss the average-case running time when
the probability distribution is over the inputs to the algorithm, and we discuss the
expected running time when the algorithm itself makes random choices.
Exercises
5.1-1
Show that the assumption that we are always able to determine which candidate is
best, in line 4 of procedure H
IRE-ASSISTANT, implies that we know a total order
on the ranks of the candidates.
5.1-2?
Describe an implementation of the procedure R
ANDOM.a; b/that only makes calls
to  R
ANDOM.0; 1/.   What  is  the  expected  running  time  of  your  procedure,  as  a
function ofaandb?
5.1-3?
Suppose that you want to output0with probability1=2and1with probability1=2.
At your disposal is a procedure  B
IASED-RANDOM, that outputs either0or1.It
outputs1with some probabilitypand0with probability1p,where0<p<1,
but you do not know whatpis.  Give an algorithm that uses B
IASED-RANDOM
as a subroutine, and returns an unbiased answer, returning0with probability1=2

118Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
and1with probability1=2.  What is the expected running time of your algorithm
as a function ofp?
5.2  Indicator random variables
In order to analyze many algorithms, including the hiring problem, we use indicator
random  variables.   Indicator  random  variables  provide  a  convenient  method  for
converting between probabilities and expectations. Suppose we are given a sample
spaceSand an eventA. Then theindicator random variableI
f
A
g
associated with
eventAis defined as
I
f
A
g
D
(
1ifAoccurs;
0ifAdoes not occur:
(5.1)
As a simple example,  let us determine the expected  number of heads that we
obtain when flipping a fair coin. Our sample space isSD
f
H; T
g
, with Pr
f
H
g
D
Pr
f
T
g
D1=2.  We can then define an indicator random variableX
H
, associated
with the coin coming up heads,  which is the eventH.  This variable counts the
number of heads obtained in this flip, and it is1if the coin comes up heads and0
otherwise. We write
X
H
DI
f
H
g
D
(
1ifHoccurs;
0ifToccurs:
The expected number of heads obtained in one flip of the coin is simply the ex-
pected value of our indicator variableX
H
:
EŒX
H
DEŒI
f
H
g

D1Pr
f
H
g
C0Pr
f
T
g
D1.1=2/C0.1=2/
D1=2 :
Thus the expected number of heads obtained by one flip of a fair coin is1=2.As
the following lemma shows,  the expected value of an indicator  random  variable
associated with an eventAis equal to the probability thatAoccurs.
Lemma 5.1
Given a sample spaceSandaneventAin the sample spaceS,letX
A
DI
f
A
g
.
Then EŒX
A
DPr
f
A
g
.

5.2Indicator random variables119
ProofBy the definition of an indicator random variable from equation (5.1) and
the definition of expected value, we have
EŒX
A
DEŒI
f
A
g

D1Pr
f
A
g
C0Pr
 ̊
A


DPr
f
A
g
;
where
AdenotesSA, the complement ofA.
Although indicator random variables may seem cumbersome for an application
such as counting the expected number of heads on a flip of a single coin, they are
useful for analyzing situations in which we perform repeated random trials.  For
example,  indicator  random variables give us a simple way to arrive at the result
of equation (C.37).  In this equation,  we compute the number of heads inncoin
flips by considering separately the probability of obtaining0heads,1head,2heads,
etc. The simpler method proposed in equation (C.38) instead uses indicator random
variables implicitly. Making this argument more explicit, we letX
i
be the indicator
random variable associated with the event in which theith flip comes up heads:
X
i
DI
f
theith flip results in the eventH
g
.LetXbe the random variable denoting
the total number of heads in thencoin flips, so that
XD
n
X
iD1
X
i
:
We wish to compute the expected number of heads, and so we take the expectation
of both sides of the above equation to obtain
EŒX DE
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
:
The above equation gives the expectation of the sum ofnindicator random vari-
ables. By Lemma 5.1, we can easily compute the expectation of each of the random
variables. By equation (C.21)—linearity of expectation—it is easy to compute the
expectation  of  the  sum:  it  equals  the  sum  of  the  expectations  of  thenrandom
variables.  Linearity of expectation makes the use of indicator random variables a
powerful analytical technique; it applies even when there is dependence among the
random variables. We now can easily compute the expected number of heads:

120Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
EŒX DE
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
D
n
X
iD1
EŒX
i

D
n
X
iD1
1=2
Dn=2 :
Thus, compared to the method used in equation (C.37), indicator random variables
greatly simplify the calculation.  We shall use indicator random variables through-
out this book.
Analysis of the hiring problem using indicator random variables
Returning to the hiring problem, we now wish to compute the expected number of
times that we hire a new office assistant. In order to use a probabilistic analysis, we
assume that the candidates arrive in a random order, as discussed in the previous
section. (We shall see in Section 5.3 how to remove this assumption.) LetXbe the
random variable whose value equals the number of times we hire a new office as-
sistant. We could then apply the definition of expected value from equation (C.20)
to obtain
EŒX D
n
X
xD1
xPr
f
XDx
g
;
but this calculation would be cumbersome.  We shall instead use indicator random
variables to greatly simplify the calculation.
To use indicator random variables, instead of computing EŒX by defining one
variable  associated  with the number of times we hire a new office assistant,  we
definenvariables related to whether or not each particular candidate is hired.  In
particular, we letX
i
be the indicator random variable associated with the event in
which theith candidate is hired. Thus,
X
i
DI
f
candidateiis hired
g
D
(
1if candidateiis hired;
0if candidateiis not hired;
and
XDX
1
CX
2
CCX
n
:(5.2)

5.2Indicator random variables121
By Lemma 5.1, we have that
EŒX
i
DPr
f
candidateiis hired
g
;
and we must therefore compute the probability that lines 5–6 of H
IRE-ASSISTANT
are executed.
Candidateiis hired, in line 6, exactly when candidateiis better than each of
candidates1throughi1. Because we have assumed that the candidates arrive in
a random order, the firsticandidates have appeared in a random order. Any one of
these firsticandidates is equally likely to be the best-qualified so far. Candidatei
has a probability of1= iof being better qualified than candidates1throughi1
and thus a probability of1= iof being hired. By Lemma 5.1, we conclude that
EŒX
i
D1= i :(5.3)
Now we can compute EŒX :
EŒX DE
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
(by equation (5.2))(5.4)
D
n
X
iD1
EŒX
i
(by linearity of expectation)
D
n
X
iD1
1= i(by equation (5.3))
DlnnCO.1/(by equation (A.7))  .(5.5)
Even though we interviewnpeople, we actually hire only approximately lnnof
them, on average. We summarize this result in the following lemma.
Lemma 5.2
Assuming that the candidates  are presented in a random order,  algorithm  H
IRE-
A
SSISTANThas an average-case total hiring cost ofO.c
h
lnn/.
ProofThe  bound  follows  immediately  from  our  definition  of  the  hiring  cost
and  equation  (5.5),  which  shows  that  the  expected  number  of  hires  is  approxi-
mately lnn.
The average-case  hiring cost is a significant  improvement over the worst-case
hiring cost ofO.c
h
n/.

122Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
Exercises
5.2-1
In H
IRE-ASSISTANT, assuming that the candidates are presented in a random or-
der, what is the probability that you hire exactly one time? What is the probability
that you hire exactlyntimes?
5.2-2
In H
IRE-ASSISTANT, assuming that the candidates are presented in a random or-
der, what is the probability that you hire exactly twice?
5.2-3
Use indicator random variables to compute the expected value of the sum ofndice.
5.2-4
Use indicator random variables to solve the following problem, which is known as
thehat-check problem. Each ofncustomers gives a hat to a hat-check person at a
restaurant.  The hat-check person gives the hats back to the customers in a random
order. What is the expected number of customers who get back their own hat?
5.2-5
LetAŒ1 : : nbe an array ofndistinct numbers.  Ifi<jandAŒi  > AŒj ,then
the pair.i; j /is called aninversionofA.  (See Problem 2-4 for more on inver-
sions.)   Suppose  that  the elements  ofAform  a uniform  random  permutation  of
h1;2;:::;ni.  Use indicator random variables to compute the expected number of
inversions.
5.3  Randomized algorithms
In the previous section, we showed how knowing a distribution on the inputs can
help us to analyze the average-case behavior of an algorithm.  Many times, we do
not have such knowledge, thus precluding an average-case analysis. As mentioned
in Section 5.1, we may be able to use a randomized algorithm.
For a problem such as the hiring problem, in which it is helpful to assume that
all permutations of the input are equally likely, a probabilistic analysis can guide
the development  of  a randomized  algorithm.   Instead  of  assuming  a distribution
of inputs,  we impose a distribution.   In particular,  before running the algorithm,
we randomly permute the candidates  in order  to enforce  the property  that every
permutation is equally likely.  Although we have modified the algorithm, we still
expect to hire a new office assistant approximately lnntimes.  But now we expect

5.3Randomized algorithms123
this to be the case foranyinput,  rather  than  for  inputs  drawn from  a particular
distribution.
Let us further explore the distinction between probabilistic analysis and random-
ized algorithms.  In Section 5.2, we claimed that, assuming that the candidates ar-
rive in a random order, the expected number of times we hire a new office assistant
is about lnn. Note that the algorithm here is deterministic; for any particular input,
the number of times a new office assistant is hired is always the same. Furthermore,
the number of times we hire a new office assistant differs for different inputs, and it
depends on the ranks of the various candidates. Since this number depends only on
the ranks of the candidates, we can represent a particular input by listing, in order,
the ranks of the candidates, i.e.,hrank.1/;rank.2/;:::;rank.n/i.  Given the rank
listA
1
Dh1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6; 7; 8; 9; 10i, a new office assistant is always hired10times,
since each successive candidate is better than the previous one, and lines 5–6 are
executed in each iteration. Given the list of ranksA
2
Dh10; 9; 8; 7; 6; 5; 4; 3; 2; 1i,
a new office assistant is hired only once, in the first iteration.  Given a list of ranks
A
3
Dh5; 2; 1; 8; 4; 7; 10; 9; 3; 6i,  a  new  office  assistant  is  hired  three  times,
upon interviewing the candidates with ranks5,8,and10.  Recalling that the cost
of our algorithm depends on how many times we hire a new office assistant,  we
see that there are expensive inputs such asA
1
, inexpensive inputs such asA
2
,and
moderately expensive inputs such asA
3
.
Consider,  on the other hand,  the randomized algorithm  that first permutes the
candidates and then determines the best candidate.  In this case, we randomize in
the algorithm, not in the input distribution. Given a particular input, sayA
3
above,
we cannot  say how  many times  the maximum is updated,  because  this  quantity
differs with each run of the algorithm.  The first time we run the algorithm onA
3
,
it may produce the permutationA
1
and perform10updates;  but the second time
we run the algorithm, we may produce the permutationA
2
and perform only one
update.  The third time we run it, we may perform some other number of updates.
Each  time  we  run  the  algorithm,  the  execution  depends  on  the  random  choices
made and is likely to differ from the previous execution of the algorithm.  For this
algorithm  and many other  randomized  algorithms,no particular  input  elicits  its
worst-case behavior.  Even your worst enemy cannot produce a bad input array,
since the random permutation makes the input order irrelevant.  The randomized
algorithm performs badly only if the random-number generator produces an “un-
lucky” permutation.
For the hiring problem, the only change needed in the code is to randomly per-
mute the array.

124Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
RANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT.n/
1randomly permute the list of candidates
2bestD0//candidate 0 is a least-qualified dummy candidate
3foriD1ton
4interview candidatei
5ifcandidateiis better than candidatebest
6bestDi
7hire candidatei
With this simple change, we have created a randomized algorithm whose perfor-
mance matches that obtained by assuming that the candidates were presented in a
random order.
Lemma 5.3
The  expected  hiring  cost  of  the  procedure  R
ANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANTis
O.c
h
lnn/.
ProofAfter permuting the input array, we have achieved a situation identical to
that of the probabilistic analysis of H
IRE-ASSISTANT.
Comparing Lemmas 5.2 and 5.3 highlights the difference between probabilistic
analysis and randomized algorithms. In Lemma 5.2, we make an assumption about
the input. In Lemma 5.3, we make no such assumption, although randomizing the
input takes some additional time.  To remain consistent with our terminology, we
couched  Lemma 5.2 in terms of the average-case  hiring cost and Lemma 5.3 in
terms of the expected hiring cost. In the remainder of this section, we discuss some
issues involved in randomly permuting inputs.
Randomly permuting arrays
Many randomized  algorithms randomize  the input by permuting the given input
array.  (There are other ways to use randomization.)   Here, we shall discuss two
methods for doing so. We assume that we are given an arrayAwhich, without loss
of generality, contains the elements1throughn.  Our goal is to produce a random
permutation of the array.
One common method is to assign each elementAŒi of the array a random pri-
orityPŒi, and then sort the elements ofAaccording to these priorities.  For ex-
ample,  if our initial  array  isADh1; 2; 3; 4iand  we choose  random  priorities
PDh36; 3; 62; 19i, we would produce an arrayBDh2; 4; 1; 3i, since the second
priority is the smallest, followed by the fourth, then the first, and finally the third.
We call this procedure P
ERMUTE-BY-SORTING:

5.3Randomized algorithms125
PERMUTE-BY-SORTING.A/
1nDA:length
2letPŒ1::nbe a new array
3foriD1ton
4PŒiDR
ANDOM.1; n
3
/
5sortA,usingPas sort keys
Line 4 chooses a random number between1andn
3
.  We use a range of1ton
3
to make it likely that all the priorities inPare unique.  (Exercise 5.3-5 asks you
to prove  that  the  probability  that  all  entries  are  unique  is  at least11=n,and
Exercise 5.3-6 asks how to implement the algorithm even if two or more priorities
are identical.) Let us assume that all the priorities are unique.
The time-consuming step in this procedure is the sorting in line 5.  As we shall
see in Chapter 8, if we use a comparison sort,  sorting takes.nlgn/time.  We
can achieve this lower bound, since we have seen that merge sort takes‚.nlgn/
time.   (We  shall  see  other  comparison  sorts  that  take‚.nlgn/time  in  Part  II.
Exercise 8.3-4 asks you to solve the very similar problem of sorting numbers in the
range0ton
3
1inO.n/time.) After sorting, ifPŒiis thejth smallest priority,
thenAŒi lies in positionjof the output. In this manner we obtain a permutation. It
remains to prove that the procedure produces auniform random permutation,that
is, that the procedure is equally likely to produce every permutation of the numbers
1throughn.
Lemma 5.4
Procedure P
ERMUTE-BY-SORTINGproduces a uniform random permutation of the
input, assuming that all priorities are distinct.
ProofWe  start  by  considering  the  particular  permutation  in  which  each  ele-
mentAŒi receives theith smallest priority.  We shall show that this permutation
occurs  with  probability  exactly1=nŠ.ForiD1;2;:::;n,letE
i
be  the  event
that elementAŒi receives theith smallest priority.  Then we wish to compute the
probability that for alli,eventE
i
occurs, which is
Pr
f
E
1
\E
2
\E
3
\\E
n1
\E
n
g
:
Using Exercise C.2-5, this probability is equal to
Pr
f
E
1
g
Pr
f
E
2
jE
1
g
Pr
f
E
3
jE
2
\E
1
g
Pr
f
E
4
jE
3
\E
2
\E
1
g
Pr
f
E
i
jE
i1
\E
i2
\\E
1
g
Pr
f
E
n
jE
n1
\\E
1
g
:
We  have  that  P r
f
E
1
g
D1=nbecause  it  is  the  probability  that  one  priority
chosen  randomly  out  of  a  set  ofnis  the  smallest  priority.    Next,  we  observe

126Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
that  Pr
f
E
2
jE
1
g
D1=.n1/because  given  that  elementAŒ1has  the  small-
est  priority,  each  of  the  remainingn1elements  has  an  equal  chance  of  hav-
ing  the  second  smallest  priority.   In  general,  foriD2;3;:::;n,wehavethat
Pr
f
E
i
jE
i1
\E
i2
\\E
1
g
D1=.niC1/, since, given that elementsAŒ1
throughAŒi1have thei1smallest priorities (in order), each of the remaining
n.i1/elements has an equal chance of having theith smallest priority. Thus,
we have
Pr
f
E
1
\E
2
\E
3
\\E
n1
\E
n
g
D

1
n

1
n1



1
2

1
1

D
1
nŠ
;
and  we  have  shown  that  the  probability  of  obtaining  the  identity  permutation
is1=nŠ.
We can extend this proof to work for any permutation of priorities.   Consider
any fixed permutation	Dh	 .1/; 	 .2/; : : : ; 	 .n/iof the set
f
1;2;:::;n
g
.Letus
denote byr
i
the rank of the priority assigned to elementAŒi , where the element
with thejth smallest priority has rankj.IfwedefineE
i
as the event in which
elementAŒi receives the	.i/th smallest priority,  orr
i
D	.i/, the same proof
still applies.  Therefore, if we calculate the probability of obtaining any particular
permutation, the calculation is identical to the one above, so that the probability of
obtaining this permutation is also1=nŠ.
You might think that to prove that a permutation is a uniform random permuta-
tion, it suffices to show that, for each elementAŒi , the probability that the element
winds up in positionjis1=n. Exercise 5.3-4 shows that this weaker condition is,
in fact, insufficient.
A better method for generating a random permutation is to permute the given
array in place.  The procedure R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACEdoes so inO.n/time.  In
itsith iteration, it chooses the elementAŒi randomly from among elementsAŒi 
throughAŒn. Subsequent to theith iteration,AŒi is never altered.
R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACE.A/
1nDA:length
2foriD1ton
3swapAŒi withAŒR
ANDOM.i; n/
We shall use a loop invariant to show that procedure  R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACE
produces  a  uniform  random  permutation.   Ak-permutationon  a  set  ofnele-
ments  is  a  sequence  containingkof  thenelements,  with  no  repetitions.   (See
Appendix C.) There arenŠ=.nk/Šsuch possiblek-permutations.

5.3Randomized algorithms127
Lemma 5.5
Procedure R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACEcomputes a uniform random permutation.
ProofWe use the following loop invariant:
Just prior to theith iteration of theforloop of lines 2–3, for each possible
.i1/-permutation of thenelements, the subarrayAŒ1 : : i1contains
this.i1/-permutation with probability.niC1/Š=nŠ.
We need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop iteration, that each
iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, and that the invariant provides a useful
property to show correctness when the loop terminates.
Initialization:Consider  the  situation  just  before  the  first  loop  iteration,  so that
iD1.  The loop invariant says that for each possible0-permutation,  the sub-
arrayAŒ1 : : 0contains this0-permutation with probability.niC1/Š=nŠD
nŠ=nŠD1.  The subarrayAŒ1 : : 0is an empty subarray, and a0-permutation
has no elements. Thus,AŒ1 : : 0contains any0-permutation with probability1,
and the loop invariant holds prior to the first iteration.
Maintenance:We  assume   that   just   before   theith   iteration,   each   possible
.i1/-permutation  appears  in  the  subarrayAŒ1 : : i1with  probability
.niC1/Š=nŠ,  and we shall show that after theith iteration,  each possible
i-permutation  appears  in the  subarrayAŒ1 : : i with  probability.ni/Š=nŠ.
Incrementingifor the next iteration then maintains the loop invariant.
Let us examine theith iteration.  Consider a particulari
-permutation, and de-
note  the elements  in it byhx
1
;x
2
; :::; x
i
i.   This permutation  consists  of  an
.i1/-permutationhx
1
;:::;x
i1
ifollowed by the valuex
i
that the algorithm
places inAŒi .LetE
1
denote the event in which the firsti1iterations have
created the particular.i1/-permutationhx
1
;:::;x
i1
iinAŒ1 : : i1.Bythe
loop invariant, Pr
f
E
1
g
D.niC1/Š=nŠ.LetE
2
be the event thatith iteration
putsx
i
in positionAŒi .Thei-permutationhx
1
;:::;x
i
iappears inAŒ1 : : i pre-
cisely when bothE
1
andE
2
occur, and so we wish to compute Pr
f
E
2
\E
1
g
.
Using equation (C.14), we have
Pr
f
E
2
\E
1
g
DPr
f
E
2
jE
1
g
Pr
f
E
1
g
:
The probability Pr
f
E
2
jE
1
g
equals1=.niC1/because in line 3 the algorithm
choosesx
i
randomly from theniC1values in positionsAŒi : : n. Thus, we
have

128Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
Pr
f
E
2
\E
1
g
DPr
f
E
2
jE
1
g
Pr
f
E
1
g
D
1
niC1

.niC1/Š
nŠ
D
.ni/Š
nŠ
:
Termination:At termination,iDnC1, and we have that the subarrayAŒ1 : : n
is a givenn-permutation with probability.n.nC1/C1/=nŠD0Š=nŠD1=nŠ.
Thus, R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACEproduces a uniform random permutation.
A randomized algorithm is often the simplest and most efficient way to solve a
problem. We shall use randomized algorithms occasionally throughout this book.
Exercises
5.3-1
Professor Marceau objects to the loop invariant used in the proof of Lemma 5.5. He
questions whether it is true prior to the first iteration. He reasons that we could just
as easily declare that an empty subarray contains no0-permutations.  Therefore,
the probability that an empty subarray contains a0-permutation should be0, thus
invalidating  the loop invariant  prior  to the first iteration.   Rewrite the procedure
R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACEso that its associated loop invariant applies to a nonempty
subarray prior to the first iteration, and modify the proof of Lemma 5.5 for your
procedure.
5.3-2
Professor Kelp decides to write a procedure that produces at random any permuta-
tion besides the identity permutation. He proposes the following procedure:
P
ERMUTE-WITHOUT-IDENTITY.A/
1nDA:length
2foriD1ton1
3swapAŒi withAŒR
ANDOM.iC1; n/
Does this code do what Professor Kelp intends?
5.3-3
Suppose that instead of swapping elementAŒi with a random element from the
subarrayAŒi : : n,  we swapped  it with a random  element  from  anywhere  in the
array:

5.3Randomized algorithms129
PERMUTE-WITH-ALL.A/
1nDA:length
2foriD1ton
3swapAŒi withAŒR
ANDOM.1; n/
Does this code produce a uniform random permutation? Why or why not?
5.3-4
Professor  Armstrong suggests  the following  procedure  for  generating  a uniform
random permutation:
P
ERMUTE-BY-CYCLIC.A/
1nDA:length
2letBŒ1::nbe a new array
3offsetDR
ANDOM.1; n/
4foriD1ton
5destDiCoffset
6ifdest>n
7destDdestn
8BŒdestDAŒi 
9returnB
Show that each elementAŒi has a1=nprobability of winding up in any particular
position inB.  Then show that Professor Armstrong is mistaken by showing that
the resulting permutation is not uniformly random.
5.3-5?
Prove that in the arrayPin procedure  P
ERMUTE-BY-SORTING,  the probability
that all elements are unique is at least11=n.
5.3-6
Explain how to implement  the algorithm  P
ERMUTE-BY-SORTINGto handle the
case in which two or more priorities are identical.  That is, your algorithm should
produce a uniform random permutation, even if two or more priorities are identical.
5.3-7
Suppose  we want  to  create  arandom sampleof  the  set
f
1; 2; 3; : : : ; n
g
,thatis,
anm-element  subsetS,where0mn, such that eachm-subset is equally
likely to be created.  One way would be to setAŒi DiforiD1; 2; 3; : : : ; n,
call  R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACE.A/,  and  then  take  just  the  firstmarray  elements.
This method would makencalls to the R
ANDOMprocedure.  Ifnis much larger
thanm, we can create a random sample with fewer calls to R
ANDOM.  Show that

130Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
the following recursive procedure returns a randomm-subsetSof
f
1; 2; 3; : : : ; n
g
,
in which eachm-subset is equally likely, while making onlymcalls to R
ANDOM:
R
ANDOM-SAMPLE.m; n/
1ifm
==0
2return;
3elseSDR
ANDOM-SAMPLE.m1; n1/
4iDR
ANDOM.1; n/
5ifi2S
6SDS[
f
n
g
7elseSDS[
f
i
g
8returnS
?5.4  Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables
This advanced section further illustrates probabilistic analysis by way of four ex-
amples.   The first determines  the probability  that  in a room ofkpeople,  two of
them share the same birthday.  The second example examines what happens when
we randomly toss balls into bins.  The third investigates “streaks” of consecutive
heads when we flip coins. The final example analyzes a variant of the hiring prob-
lem  in  which  you  have  to  make  decisions  without  actually  interviewing  all  the
candidates.
5.4.1  The birthday paradox
Our first example is thebirthday paradox.  How many people must there be in a
room before there is a 50% chance that two of them were born on the same day of
the year? The answer is surprisingly few. The paradox is that it is in fact far fewer
than the number of days in a year, or even half the number of days in a year, as we
shall see.
To  answer  this  question,  we  index  the  people  in  the  room  with  the  integers
1;2;:::;k,wherekis the number  of  people  in the room.   We ignore  the issue
of leap years and assume that all years havenD365days.  ForiD1;2;:::;k,
letb
i
be the day of the year on which personi’s birthday falls, where1b
i
n.
We also assume that birthdays are uniformly distributed across thendays of the
year, so that Pr
f
b
i
Dr
g
D1=nforiD1;2;:::;kandrD1;2;:::;n.
The probability  that  two given people,  sayiandj,  have  matching  birthdays
depends on whether the random selection of birthdays is independent.  We assume
from now on that birthdays are independent, so that the probability thati’s birthday

5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables131
andj’s birthday both fall on dayris
Pr
f
b
i
Drandb
j
Dr
g
DPr
f
b
i
Dr
g
Pr
f
b
j
Dr
g
D1=n
2
:
Thus, the probability that they both fall on the same day is
Pr
f
b
i
Db
j
g
D
n
X
rD1
Pr
f
b
i
Drandb
j
Dr
g
D
n
X
rD1
.1=n
2
/
D1=n :(5.6)
More intuitively, onceb
i
is chosen, the probability thatb
j
is chosen to be the same
day is1=n.  Thus, the probability thatiandjhave the same birthday is the same
as the probability  that the birthday of one of them falls on a given day.  Notice,
however,  that this coincidence  depends  on the assumption  that the birthdays  are
independent.
We can analyze the probability  of at least2out ofkpeople having matching
birthdays by looking at the complementary event. The probability that at least two
of the birthdays match is1minus the probability that all the birthdays are different.
The event thatkpeople have distinct birthdays is
B
k
D
k
\
iD1
A
i
;
whereA
i
is  the  event  that  personi’s  birthday  is  different  from  personj’s  for
allj<i.  Since we can writeB
k
DA
k
\B
k1
, we obtain from equation (C.16)
the recurrence
Pr
f
B
k
g
DPr
f
B
k1
g
Pr
f
A
k
jB
k1
g
;(5.7)
where we take Pr
f
B
1
g
DPr
f
A
1
g
D1as an initial  condition.   In other  words,
the  probability  thatb
1
;b
2
;:::;b
k
are  distinct  birthdays  is  the  probability  that
b
1
;b
2
;:::;b
k1
are  distinct  birthdays  times  the  probability  thatb
k
¤b
i
for
iD1;2;:::;k1, given thatb
1
;b
2
;:::;b
k1
are distinct.
Ifb
1
;b
2
;:::;b
k1
are  distinct,  the  conditional  probability  thatb
k
¤b
i
for
iD1;2;:::;k1is Pr
f
A
k
jB
k1
g
D.nkC1/=n, since out of thendays,
n.k1/days are not taken. We iteratively apply the recurrence (5.7) to obtain

132Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
Pr
f
B
k
g
DPr
f
B
k1
g
Pr
f
A
k
jB
k1
g
DPr
f
B
k2
g
Pr
f
A
k1
jB
k2
g
Pr
f
A
k
jB
k1
g
:
:
:
DPr
f
B
1
g
Pr
f
A
2
jB
1
g
Pr
f
A
3
jB
2
g
Pr
f
A
k
jB
k1
g
D1

n1
n

n2
n



nkC1
n

D1

1
1
n

1
2
n



1
k1
n

:
Inequality (3.12),1Cxe
x
,givesus
Pr
f
B
k
g
e
1=n
e
2=n
e
.k1/=n
De

P
k1
iD1
i=n
De
k.k1/=2n
1=2
whenk.k1/=2nln.1=2/.  The probability that allkbirthdays are distinct
is at most1=2whenk.k1/2nln2or, solving the quadratic equation, when
k.1C
p
1C.8ln2/n/=2.FornD365,wemusthavek23.  Thus, if at
least 23 people are in a room, the probability is at least1=2that at least two people
have the same birthday.   On Mars,  a year is 669 Martian days long;  it therefore
takes31Martians to get the same effect.
An analysis using indicator random variables
We can use indicator random variables to provide a simpler but approximate anal-
ysis of the birthday paradox.  For each pair.i; j /of thekpeople in the room, we
define the indicator random variableX
ij
,for1i<jk,by
X
ij
DI
f
personiand personjhave the same birthday
g
D
(
1if personiand personjhave the same birthday;
0otherwise:
By equation (5.6), the probability that two people have matching birthdays is1=n,
and thus by Lemma 5.1, we have
EŒX
ij
DPr
f
personiand personjhave the same birthday
g
D1=n :
LettingXbe the random variable that counts the number of pairs of individuals
having the same birthday, we have

5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables133
XD
k
X
iD1
k
X
jDiC1
X
ij
:
Taking expectations of both sides and applying linearity of expectation, we obtain
EŒX DE
"
k
X
iD1
k
X
jDiC1
X
ij
#
D
k
X
iD1
k
X
jDiC1
EŒX
ij

D
 
k
2
!
1
n
D
k.k1/
2n
:
Whenk.k1/2n, therefore, the expected number of pairs of people with the
same birthday is at least1. Thus, if we have at least
p
2nC1individuals in a room,
we can expect at least two to have the same birthday.  FornD365,ifkD28,the
expected number of pairs with the same birthday is.2827/=.2365/1:0356.
Thus, with at least 28 people, we expect to find at least one matching pair of birth-
days.  On Mars, where a year is669Martian days long, we need at least38Mar-
tians.
The first analysis, which used only probabilities, determined the number of peo-
ple required  for the probability  to exceed1=2that  a matching  pair  of  birthdays
exists, and the second analysis, which used indicator random variables, determined
the number such that the expected number of matching birthdays is1.  Although
the exact numbers of people differ for the two situations, they are the same asymp-
totically:‚.
p
n/.
5.4.2  Balls and bins
Consider a process in which we randomly toss identical balls intobbins, numbered
1;2;:::;b.  The tosses are independent, and on each toss the ball is equally likely
to end up in any bin. The probability that a tossed ball lands in any given bin is1=b.
Thus, the ball-tossing process is a sequence of Bernoulli trials (see Appendix C.4)
with a probability1=bof success,  where success means that the ball falls in the
given bin. This model is particularly useful for analyzing hashing (see Chapter 11),
and we can answer a variety of interesting questions about the ball-tossing process.
(Problem C-1 asks additional questions about balls and bins.)

134Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
How many balls fall in a given bin?The number of balls that fall in a given bin
follows the binomial distributionb.kIn; 1=b/.Ifwetossnballs, equation (C.37)
tells us that the expected number of balls that fall in the given bin isn=b.
How many balls must we toss, on the average, until a given bin contains a ball?
The  number  of  tosses  until  the  given  bin  receives  a  ball  follows  the  geometric
distribution with probability1=band, by equation (C.32), the expected number of
tosses until success is1=.1=b/Db.
How many balls must we toss until every bin contains at least one ball?Let us
call a toss in which a ball falls into an empty bin a “hit.”  We want to know the
expected numbernof tosses required to getbhits.
Using the hits, we can partition thentosses into stages. Theith stage consists of
the tosses after the.i1/st hit until theith hit. The first stage consists of the first
toss, since we are guaranteed to have a hit when all bins are empty.  For each toss
during theith stage,i1bins contain balls andbiC1bins are empty.  Thus,
for each toss in theith stage, the probability of obtaining a hit is.biC1/=b.
Letn
i
denote the number of tosses in theith stage.  Thus, the number of tosses
required to getbhits isnD
P
b
iD1
n
i
.  Each random variablen
i
has a geometric
distribution with probability of success.biC1/=band thus, by equation (C.32),
we have
EŒn
i
D
b
biC1
:
By linearity of expectation, we have
EŒnDE
"
b
X
iD1
n
i
#
D
b
X
iD1
EŒn
i

D
b
X
iD1
b
biC1
Db
b
X
iD1
1
i
Db.lnbCO.1//(by equation (A.7))  .
It therefore takes approximatelyblnbtosses before we can expect that every bin
has a ball.  This problem is also known as thecoupon collector’s problem,which
says that a person trying to collect each ofbdifferent coupons expects to acquire
approximatelyblnbrandomly obtained coupons in order to succeed.

5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables135
5.4.3  Streaks
Suppose you flip a fair  coinntimes.   What is the longest  streak  of consecutive
heads  that  you expect  to see?   The answer  is‚.lgn/,  as the following  analysis
shows.
We first prove that the expected length of the longest streak of heads isO.lgn/.
The probability  that each coin flip is a head is1=2.LetA
ik
be the event that a
streak of heads of length at leastkbegins with theith coin flip or, more precisely,
the event that thekconsecutive coin flipsi; iC1;:::;iCk1yield only heads,
where1knand1inkC1. Since coin flips are mutually independent,
for any given eventA
ik
, the probability that allkflips are heads is
Pr
f
A
ik
g
D1=2
k
:(5.8)
ForkD2
d
lgn
e
,
Pr
f
A
i;2dlgne
g
D1=2
2dlgne
1=2
2lgn
D1=n
2
;
and thus the probability that a streak of heads of length at least2
d
lgn
e
begins in
positioniis quite small.  There are at mostn2
d
lgn
e
C1positions where such
a streak can begin. The probability that a streak of heads of length at least2
d
lgn
e
begins anywhere is therefore
Pr
(
n2dlgneC1
[
iD1
A
i;2dlgne
)

n2dlgneC1
X
iD1
1=n
2
<
n
X
iD1
1=n
2
D1=n ;(5.9)
since by Boole’s inequality (C.19), the probability of a union of events is at most
the sum of the probabilities of the individual events. (Note that Boole’s inequality
holds even for events such as these that are not independent.)
We  now  use  inequality  (5.9)  to  bound  the  length  of  the  longest  streak.   For
jD0; 1; 2; : : : ; n,letL
j
be the event that the longest streak of heads has length ex-
actlyj,andletLbe the length of the longest streak. By the definition of expected
value, we have
EŒLD
n
X
jD0
jPr
f
L
j
g
:(5.10)

136Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
We could try to evaluate this sum using upper bounds on each Pr
f
L
j
g
similar to
those computed in inequality (5.9).  Unfortunately, this method would yield weak
bounds.  We can use some intuition gained by the above analysis to obtain a good
bound,  however.  Informally,  we observe that for no individual  term in the sum-
mation in equation (5.10) are both the factorsjand Pr
f
L
j
g
large.  Why?  When
j2
d
lgn
e
,thenPr
f
L
j
g
is very small, and whenj<2
d
lgn
e
,thenjis fairly
small.  More formally, we note that the eventsL
j
forjD0; 1; : : : ; nare disjoint,
and so the probability that a streak of heads of length at least2
d
lgn
e
begins any-
where is
P
n
jD2dlgne
Pr
f
L
j
g
. By inequality (5.9), we have
P
n
jD2dlgne
Pr
f
L
j
g
<1=n.
Also, noting that
P
n
jD0
Pr
f
L
j
g
D1,wehavethat
P
2dlgne1
jD0
Pr
f
L
j
g
1.  Thus,
we obtain
EŒLD
n
X
jD0
jPr
f
L
j
g
D
2dlgne1
X
jD0
jPr
f
L
j
g
C
n
X
jD2dlgne
jPr
f
L
j
g
<
2dlgne1
X
jD0
.2
d
lgn
e
/Pr
f
L
j
g
C
n
X
jD2dlgne
nPr
f
L
j
g
D2
d
lgn
e
2dlgne1
X
jD0
Pr
f
L
j
g
Cn
n
X
jD2dlgne
Pr
f
L
j
g
<2
d
lgn
e
1Cn.1=n/
DO.lgn/ :
The probability that a streak of heads exceedsr
d
lgn
e
flips diminishes quickly
withr.Forr1, the probability that a streak of at leastr
d
lgn
e
heads starts in
positioniis
Pr
f
A
i;rdlgne
g
D1=2
rdlgne
1=n
r
:
Thus,  the  probability  is  at  mostn=n
r
D1=n
r1
that  the  longest  streak  is  at
leastr
d
lgn
e
, or equivalently, the probability is at least11=n
r1
that the longest
streak has length less thanr
d
lgn
e
.
As an example, fornD1000coin flips, the probability of having a streak of at
least2
d
lgn
e
D20heads is at most1=nD1=1000. The chance of having a streak
longer than3
d
lgn
e
D30heads is at most1=n
2
D1=1,000,000.
We now prove a complementary lower bound: the expected length of the longest
streak of heads inncoin flips is.lgn/. To prove this bound, we look for streaks

5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables137
of  lengthsby  partitioning  thenflips  into  approximatelyn=sgroups  ofsflips
each.  If we choosesD
b
.lgn/=2
c
, we can show that it is likely that at least one
of these groups comes up all heads, and hence it is likely that the longest streak
has length at leastsD.lgn/. We then show that the longest streak has expected
length.lgn/.
We partition thencoin flips into at least
b
n=
b
.lgn/=2
cc
groups of
b
.lgn/=2
c
consecutive flips, and we bound the probability that no group comes up all heads.
By equation (5.8), the probability that the group starting in positionicomes up all
heads is
Pr
f
A
i;b.lgn/=2c
g
D1=2
b.lgn/=2c
1=
p
n:
The probability that a streak of heads of length at least
b
.lgn/=2
c
does not begin
in positioniis therefore at most11=
p
n.  Since the
b
n=
b
.lgn/=2
cc
groups are
formed from mutually exclusive, independent coin flips, the probability that every
one of these groupsfailsto be a streak of length
b
.lgn/=2
c
is at most

11=
p
n

bn=b.lgn/=2cc


11=
p
n

n=b.lgn/=2c1


11=
p
n

2n=lgn1
e
.2n=lgn1/=
p
n
DO.e
lgn
/
DO.1=n/ :
For this argument, we used inequality (3.12),1Cxe
x
, and the fact, which you
might want to verify, that.2n=lgn1/=
p
nlgnfor sufficiently largen.
Thus, the probability that the longest streak exceeds
b
.lgn/=2
c
is
n
X
jDb.lgn/=2cC1
Pr
f
L
j
g
1O.1=n/ :(5.11)
We can now calculate a lower bound on the expected length of the longest streak,
beginning with equation (5.10) and proceeding in a manner similar to our analysis
of the upper bound:

138Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
EŒLD
n
X
jD0
jPr
f
L
j
g
D
b.lgn/=2c
X
jD0
jPr
f
L
j
g
C
n
X
jDb.lgn/=2cC1
jPr
f
L
j
g

b.lgn/=2c
X
jD0
0Pr
f
L
j
g
C
n
X
jDb.lgn/=2cC1
b
.lgn/=2
c
Pr
f
L
j
g
D0
b.lgn/=2c
X
jD0
Pr
f
L
j
g
C
b
.lgn/=2
c
n
X
jDb.lgn/=2cC1
Pr
f
L
j
g
0C
b
.lgn/=2
c
.1O.1=n//(by inequality (5.11))
D.lgn/ :
As with the birthday paradox, we can obtain a simpler but approximate analysis
using indicator random variables.  We letX
ik
DI
f
A
ik
g
be the indicator random
variable associated with a streak of heads of length at leastkbeginning with the
ith coin flip. To count the total number of such streaks, we define
XD
nkC1
X
iD1
X
ik
:
Taking expectations and using linearity of expectation, we have
EŒX DE
"
nkC1
X
iD1
X
ik
#
D
nkC1
X
iD1
EŒX
ik

D
nkC1
X
iD1
Pr
f
A
ik
g
D
nkC1
X
iD1
1=2
k
D
nkC1
2
k
:
By plugging in various values fork, we can calculate the expected number of
streaks of lengthk.  If this number is large (much greater than1), then we expect
many streaks of lengthkto occur and the probability that one occurs is high.  If

5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables139
this number is small (much less than1), then we expect few streaks of lengthkto
occur and the probability that one occurs is low.  IfkDclgn, for some positive
constantc, we obtain
EŒX D
nclgnC1
2
clgn
D
nclgnC1
n
c
D
1
n
c1

.clgn1/=n
n
c1
D‚.1=n
c1
/:
Ifcis large, the expected number of streaks of lengthclgnis small, and we con-
clude that they are unlikely to occur. On the other hand, ifcD1=2, then we obtain
EŒX D‚.1=n
1=21
/D‚.n
1=2
/, and we expect that there are a large number
of streaks of length.1=2/lgn.  Therefore, one streak of such a length is likely to
occur. From these rough estimates alone, we can conclude that the expected length
of the longest streak is‚.lgn/.
5.4.4  The on-line hiring problem
As a final example, we consider a variant of the hiring problem. Suppose now that
we do not wish to interview all the candidates in order to find the best one.  We
also do not wish to hire and fire as we find better and better applicants. Instead, we
are willing to settle for a candidate who is close to the best, in exchange for hiring
exactly once.  We must obey one company requirement:  after each interview we
must either immediately offer the position to the applicant or immediately reject the
applicant.  What is the trade-off between minimizing the amount of interviewing
and maximizing the quality of the candidate hired?
We can model this problem in the following way.  After meeting an applicant,
we are able to give each one a score; letscore.i /denote the score we give to theith
applicant, and assume that no two applicants receive the same score. After we have
seenjapplicants,  we know which of thejhas the highest score, but we do not
know whether any of the remainingnjapplicants will receive a higher score. We
decide to adopt the strategy of selecting a positive integerk<n, interviewing and
then rejecting the firstkapplicants, and hiring the first applicant thereafter who has
a higher score than all preceding applicants.  If it turns out that the best-qualified
applicant was among the firstkinterviewed,  then we hire thenth applicant.  We
formalize this strategy in the procedure O
N-LINE-MAXIMUM.k; n/, which returns
the index of the candidate we wish to hire.

140Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
ON-LINE-MAXIMUM.k; n/
1bestscoreD1
2foriD1tok
3ifscore.i / >bestscore
4bestscoreDscore.i /
5foriDkC1ton
6ifscore.i / >bestscore
7returni
8returnn
We  wish  to  determine,  for  each  possible  value  ofk,  the  probability  that  we
hire  the  most  qualified  applicant.We  then  choose  the  best  possiblek,and
implement  the  strategy  with  that  value.For  the  moment,  assume  thatkis
fixed.   LetM.j /Dmax
1ij
f
score.i /
g
denote  the  maximum  score  among  ap-
plicants1throughj.LetSbe  the event  that  we succeed  in choosing  the best-
qualified applicant, and letS
i
be the event that we succeed when the best-qualified
applicant  is theith one interviewed.   Since the variousS
i
are disjoint,  we have
that Pr
f
S
g
D
P
n
iD1
Pr
f
S
i
g
. Noting that we never succeed when the best-qualified
applicant is one of the firstk,wehavethatPr
f
S
i
g
D0foriD1;2;:::;k.  Thus,
we obtain
Pr
f
S
g
D
n
X
iDkC1
Pr
f
S
i
g
:(5.12)
We now compute Pr
f
S
i
g
. In order to succeed when the best-qualified applicant
is theith one, two things must happen.  First, the best-qualified applicant must be
in positioni, an event which we denote byB
i
.  Second,  the algorithm must not
select any of the applicants in positionskC1throughi1, which happens only if,
for eachjsuch thatkC1ji1,wefindthatscore.j / <bestscorein line 6.
(Because scores are unique, we can ignore the possibility ofscore.j /Dbestscore.)
In other words, all of the valuesscore.kC1/throughscore.i1/must be less
thanM.k/; if any are greater thanM.k/, we instead return the index of the first
one that is greater.  We useO
i
to denote the event that none of the applicants in
positionkC1throughi1are chosen.  Fortunately, the two eventsB
i
andO
i
are independent.  The eventO
i
depends only on the relative ordering of the values
in positions1throughi1,  whereasB
i
depends  only on whether  the value in
positioniis  greater  than  the  values  in  all  other  positions.   The  ordering  of  the
values in positions1throughi1does not affect whether the value in positioni
is greater than all of them, and the value in positionidoes not affect the ordering
of the values in positions1throughi1.  Thus we can apply equation (C.15) to
obtain

5.4Probabilistic analysis and further uses of indicator random variables141
Pr
f
S
i
g
DPr
f
B
i
\O
i
g
DPr
f
B
i
g
Pr
f
O
i
g
:
The  probability  Pr
f
B
i
g
is  clearly1=n,  since  the  maximum  is  equally  likely  to
be in any one of thenpositions.   For eventO
i
to occur,  the maximum value in
positions1throughi1, which is equally likely to be in any of thesei1positions,
must be in one of the firstkpositions.  Consequently,  Pr
f
O
i
g
Dk=.i1/and
Pr
f
S
i
g
Dk=.n.i1//. Using equation (5.12), we have
Pr
f
S
g
D
n
X
iDkC1
Pr
f
S
i
g
D
n
X
iDkC1
k
n.i1/
D
k
n
n
X
iDkC1
1
i1
D
k
n
n1
X
iDk
1
i
:
We approximate by integrals to bound this summation from above and below.  By
the inequalities (A.12), we have
Z
n
k
1
x
dx
n1
X
iDk
1
i

Z
n1
k1
1
x
dx :
Evaluating these definite integrals gives us the bounds
k
n
.lnnlnk/Pr
f
S
g

k
n
.ln.n1/ln.k1// ;
which provide a rather tight bound for Pr
f
S
g
.  Because we wish to maximize our
probability of success, let us focus on choosing the value ofkthat maximizes the
lower bound on Pr
f
S
g
. (Besides, the lower-bound expression is easier to maximize
than the upper-bound expression.) Differentiating the expression.k=n/.lnnlnk/
with respect tok, we obtain
1
n
.lnnlnk1/ :
Setting this derivative equal to0, we see that we maximize the lower bound on the
probability when lnkDlnn1Dln.n=e/or, equivalently, whenkDn=e. Thus,
if we implement our strategy withkDn=e, we succeed in hiring our best-qualified
applicant with probability at least1=e.

142Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
Exercises
5.4-1
How many people  must there  be in a room before  the probability  that  someone
has the same birthday as you do is at least1=2?  How many people must there be
before the probability that at least two people have a birthday on July 4 is greater
than1=2?
5.4-2
Suppose that we toss balls intobbins until some bin contains two balls. Each toss
is independent,  and each ball is equally likely to end up in any bin.  What is the
expected number of ball tosses?
5.4-3?
For the analysis of the birthday paradox, is it important that the birthdays be mutu-
ally independent, or is pairwise independence sufficient? Justify your answer.
5.4-4?
How many people should be invited to a party in order to make it likely that there
arethreepeople with the same birthday?
5.4-5?
What is the probability that ak-string over a set of sizenforms ak-permutation?
How does this question relate to the birthday paradox?
5.4-6?
Suppose thatnballs are tossed intonbins, where each toss is independent and the
ball is equally likely to end up in any bin.  What is the expected number of empty
bins? What is the expected number of bins with exactly one ball?
5.4-7?
Sharpen the lower bound on streak length by showing that innflips of a fair coin,
the probability is less than1=nthat no streak longer than lgn2lg lgnconsecutive
heads occurs.

Problems for Chapter 5143
Problems
5-1  Probabilistic counting
With ab-bit counter, we can ordinarily only count up to2
b
1.  With R. Morris’s
probabilistic counting, we can count up to a much larger value at the expense of
some loss of precision.
We let a counter value ofirepresent a count ofn
i
foriD0; 1; : : : ; 2
b
1,where
then
i
form an increasing sequence of nonnegative values. We assume that the ini-
tial value of the counter is0, representing a count ofn
0
D0.TheINCREMENT
operation works on a counter containing the valueiin a probabilistic manner.  If
iD2
b
1, then the operation reports an overflow error.  Otherwise, the INCRE-
MENToperation increases the counter by1with probability1=.n
iC1
n
i
/,andit
leaves the counter unchanged with probability11=.n
iC1
n
i
/.
If we selectn
i
Difor alli0, then the counter  is an ordinary one.  More
interesting situations arise if we select, say,n
i
D2
i1
fori>0orn
i
DF
i
(the
ith Fibonacci number—see Section 3.2).
For this problem,  assume thatn
2
b
1
is large enough that the probability of an
overflow error is negligible.
a.Show that the expected value represented by the counter afternI
NCREMENT
operations have been performed is exactlyn.
b.The analysis of the variance of the count represented by the counter depends
on  the  sequence  of  then
i
.   Let  us  consider  a  simple  case:n
i
D100ifor
alli0. Estimate the variance in the value represented by the register aftern
I
NCREMENToperations have been performed.
5-2  Searching an unsorted array
This problem examines three algorithms for searching for a valuexin an unsorted
arrayAconsisting ofnelements.
Consider the following randomized strategy:  pick a random indexiintoA.If
AŒi Dx, then we terminate; otherwise, we continue the search by picking a new
random index intoA. We continue picking random indices intoAuntil we find an
indexjsuch thatAŒj Dxor until we have checked every element ofA.Note
that we pick from the whole set of indices each time, so that we may examine a
given element more than once.
a.Write pseudocode for a procedure R
ANDOM-SEARCHto implement the strat-
egy above. Be sure that your algorithm terminates when all indices intoAhave
been picked.

144Chapter 5Probabilistic Analysis and Randomized Algorithms
b.Suppose  that  there  is  exactly  one  indexisuch  thatAŒi Dx.   What  is  the
expected  number  of  indices  intoAthat  we must  pick  before  we  findxand
R
ANDOM-SEARCHterminates?
c.Generalizing your solution to part (b), suppose that there arek1indicesi
such thatAŒi Dx.  What is the expected number of indices intoAthat we
must pick before we findxand R
ANDOM-SEARCHterminates?  Your answer
should be a function ofnandk.
d.Suppose that there are no indicesisuch thatAŒi Dx.  What is the expected
number of indices intoAthat we must pick before we have checked all elements
ofAand R
ANDOM-SEARCHterminates?
Now  consider  a  deterministic  linear  search  algorithm,  which  we  refer  to  as
D
ETERMINISTIC-SEARCH.  Specifically, the algorithm searchesAforxin order,
consideringAŒ1;AŒ2;AŒ3;:::;AŒnuntil either it findsAŒi Dxor it reaches
the end of the array.  Assume that all possible permutations of the input array are
equally likely.
e.Suppose  that  there  is  exactly  one  indexisuch  thatAŒi Dx.   What  is  the
average-case running time of D
ETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?  What is the worst-
case running time of D
ETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?
f.Generalizing your solution to part (e), suppose that there arek1indicesi
such thatAŒi Dx. What is the average-case running time of D
ETERMINISTIC-
S
EARCH? What is the worst-case running time of DETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?
Your answer should be a function ofnandk.
g.Suppose that there are no indicesisuch thatAŒi Dx. What is the average-case
running time of  D
ETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?   What is the worst-case running
time of D
ETERMINISTIC-SEARCH?
Finally,  consider  a  randomized  algorithm  S
CRAMBLE-SEARCHthat  works  by
first randomly  permuting  the input  array and then running  the deterministic  lin-
ear search given above on the resulting permuted array.
h.Lettingkbe the number of indicesisuch thatAŒi Dx, give the worst-case and
expected running times of S
CRAMBLE-SEARCHfor the cases in whichkD0
andkD1. Generalize your solution to handle the case in whichk1.
i.Which of the three searching algorithms would you use? Explain your answer.

Notes for Chapter 5145
Chapter notes
Bollob ́as [53], Hofri [174], and Spencer [321] contain a wealth of advanced prob-
abilistic techniques.  The advantages of randomized algorithms are discussed and
surveyed by Karp [200] and Rabin [288]. The textbook by Motwani and Raghavan
[262] gives an extensive treatment of randomized algorithms.
Several variants of the hiring problem have been widely studied. These problems
are more commonly referred to as “secretary problems.”  An example of work in
this area is the paper by Ajtai, Meggido, and Waarts [11].

II  Sorting and Order Statistics

Introduction
This part presents several algorithms that solve the followingsorting problem:
Input:A sequence ofnnumbersha
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
i.
Output:A permutation (reordering)ha
0
1
;a
0
2
;:::;a
0
n
iof the input sequence such
thata
0
1
a
0
2
a
0
n
.
The input sequence is usually ann-element array, although it may be represented
in some other fashion, such as a linked list.
The structure of the data
In practice, the numbers to be sorted are rarely isolated values. Each is usually part
of a collection of data called arecord.  Each record contains akey, which is the
value to be sorted. The remainder of the record consists ofsatellite data, which are
usually carried around with the key. In practice, when a sorting algorithm permutes
the keys, it must permute the satellite data as well.  If each record includes a large
amount of satellite data, we often permute an array of pointers to the records rather
than the records themselves in order to minimize data movement.
In a sense, it is these implementation details that distinguish an algorithm from
a  full-blown  program.   A  sorting  algorithm  describes  themethodby  which  we
determine the sorted order, regardless of whether we are sorting individual numbers
or large records containing many bytes of satellite data. Thus, when focusing on the
problem of sorting, we typically assume that the input consists only of numbers.
Translating  an algorithm  for sorting numbers into a program  for sorting records

148Part II    Sorting and Order Statistics
is  conceptually  straightforward,  although  in  a  given  engineering  situation  other
subtleties may make the actual programming task a challenge.
Why sorting?
Many computer scientists consider sorting to be the most fundamental problem in
the study of algorithms. There are several reasons:

Sometimes an application inherently needs to sort information.  For example,
in order to prepare customer statements,  banks need to sort checks by check
number.

Algorithms often use sorting as a key subroutine.  For example, a program that
renders graphical  objects which are layered  on top of each other  might have
to sort the objects according  to an “above” relation so that it can draw these
objects from bottom to top.  We shall see numerous algorithms in this text that
use sorting as a subroutine.

We can draw from among a wide variety of sorting algorithms, and they em-
ploy a rich set of techniques. In fact, many important techniques used through-
out algorithm design appear in the body of sorting algorithms that have been
developed over the years.  In this way, sorting is also a problem of historical
interest.

We can prove a nontrivial lower bound for sorting (as we shall do in Chapter 8).
Our best upper bounds match the lower bound asymptotically, and so we know
that our sorting algorithms are asymptotically optimal.  Moreover, we can use
the lower bound for sorting to prove lower bounds for certain other problems.

Many  engineering  issues  come  to  the  fore  when implementing  sorting  algo-
rithms.  The fastest sorting program for a particular  situation may depend on
many factors,  such  as prior  knowledge  about  the  keys and satellite  data,  the
memory hierarchy (caches and virtual memory) of the host computer, and the
software environment.  Many of these issues are best dealt with at the algorith-
mic level, rather than by “tweaking” the code.
Sorting algorithms
We introduced two algorithms that sortnreal numbers in Chapter 2. Insertion sort
takes‚.n
2
/time in the worst  case.   Because  its inner  loops  are tight,  however,
it is a fast in-place sorting algorithm for small input sizes.  (Recall that a sorting
algorithm  sortsin placeif  only  a constant  number  of  elements  of  the  input  ar-
ray are ever stored outside the array.)  Merge sort has a better asymptotic running
time,‚.nlgn/,buttheM
ERGEprocedure it uses does not operate in place.

Part IISorting and Order Statistics149
In this part, we shall introduce two more algorithms that sort arbitrary real num-
bers. Heapsort, presented in Chapter 6, sortsnnumbers in place inO.nlgn/time.
It uses an important data structure, called a heap, with which we can also imple-
ment a priority queue.
Quicksort, in Chapter 7, also sortsnnumbers in place, but its worst-case running
time is‚.n
2
/.  Its expected running time is‚.nlgn/, however, and it generally
outperforms heapsort in practice. Like insertion sort, quicksort has tight code, and
so the hidden constant factor in its running time is small. It is a popular algorithm
for sorting large input arrays.
Insertion sort, merge sort, heapsort, and quicksort are all comparison sorts: they
determine the sorted order of an input array by comparing elements. Chapter 8 be-
gins by introducing the decision-tree model in order to study the performance limi-
tations of comparison sorts. Using this model, we prove a lower bound of.nlgn/
on the worst-case running time of any comparison sort onninputs, thus showing
that heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.
Chapter 8 then goes on to show that we can beat this lower bound of.nlgn/
if we can gather information  about the sorted order of the input by means other
than comparing elements.  The counting sort algorithm, for example, assumes that
the input numbers are in the set
f
0; 1; : : : ; k
g
.  By using array indexing as a tool
for determining relative order, counting sort can sortnnumbers in‚.kCn/time.
Thus, whenkDO.n/, counting sort runs in time that is linear in the size of the
input  array.   A related  algorithm,  radix sort,  can be used to extend  the range  of
counting sort.  If there arenintegers to sort, each integer hasddigits, and each
digit  can  take  on  up  tokpossible  values,  then  radix  sort  can  sort  the  numbers
in‚.d.nCk//time.   Whendis  a  constant  andkisO.n/,  radix  sort  runs  in
linear time. A third algorithm, bucket sort, requires knowledge of the probabilistic
distribution  of numbers in the input array.  It can sortnreal numbers uniformly
distributed in the half-open intervalŒ0; 1/in average-caseO.n/time.
The following table summarizes the running times of the sorting algorithms from
Chapters 2 and 6–8. As usual,ndenotes the number of items to sort. For counting
sort, the items to sort are integers in the set
f
0; 1; : : : ; k
g
. For radix sort, each item
is ad-digit number, where each digit takes onkpossible values.  For bucket sort,
we assume that the keys are real numbers uniformly distributed in the half-open
intervalŒ0; 1/.  The rightmost column gives the average-case or expected running
time, indicating which it gives when it differs from the worst-case running time.
We omit the average-case running time of heapsort because we do not analyze it in
this book.

150Part II    Sorting and Order Statistics
Worst-caseAverage-case/expected
Algorithm
running timerunning time
Insertion sort‚.n
2
/‚.n
2
/
Merge sort
‚.nlgn/‚.nlgn/
Heapsort
O.nlgn/—
Quicksort
‚.n
2
/‚.nlgn/(expected)
Counting sort
‚.kCn/‚.kCn/
Radix sort
‚.d.nCk//‚.d.nCk//
Bucket sort
‚.n
2
/‚.n/(average-case)
Order statistics
Theith order statistic of a set ofnnumbers is theith smallest number in the set.
We can, of course, select theith order statistic by sorting the input and indexing
theith element of the output.  With no assumptions about the input distribution,
this method runs in.nlgn/time, as the lower bound proved in Chapter 8 shows.
In Chapter 9, we show that we can find theith smallest element inO.n/time,
even when the elements are arbitrary real numbers. We present a randomized algo-
rithm with tight pseudocode that runs in‚.n
2
/time in the worst case, but whose
expected running time isO.n/.  We also give a more complicated algorithm that
runs inO.n/worst-case time.
Background
Although most of this part does not rely on difficult mathematics, some sections
do require mathematical sophistication. In particular, analyses of quicksort, bucket
sort,  and  the order-statistic  algorithm  use  probability,  which  is reviewed  in  Ap-
pendix C, and the material on probabilistic analysis and randomized algorithms in
Chapter 5.  The analysis of the worst-case linear-time algorithm for order statis-
tics involves somewhat more sophisticated mathematics than the other worst-case
analyses in this part.

6Heapsort
In this chapter, we introduce another sorting algorithm: heapsort. Like merge sort,
but unlike insertion sort, heapsort’s running time isO.nlgn/.  Like insertion sort,
but  unlike  merge  sort,  heapsort  sorts  in place:  only  a constant  number  of  array
elements are stored outside the input array at any time.  Thus, heapsort combines
the better attributes of the two sorting algorithms we have already discussed.
Heapsort also introduces another algorithm design technique: using a data struc-
ture, in this case one we call a “heap,” to manage information. Not only is the heap
data structure useful for heapsort, but it also makes an efficient priority queue. The
heap data structure will reappear in algorithms in later chapters.
The term “heap” was originally coined in the context of heapsort, but it has since
come to refer to “garbage-collected storage,” such as the programming languages
Java and Lisp provide.  Our heap data structure isnotgarbage-collected  storage,
and whenever we refer to heaps in this book, we shall mean a data structure rather
than an aspect of garbage collection.
6.1  Heaps
The(binary) heapdata  structure  is  an  array  object  that  we  can  view  as  a
nearly  complete  binary  tree  (see  Section  B.5.3),  as  shown  in  Figure  6.1.   Each
node  of  the  tree  corresponds  to  an  element  of  the  array.The  tree  is  com-
pletely  filled  on  all  levels  except  possibly  the  lowest,  which  is  filled  from  the
left  up  to  a  point.   An  arrayAthat  represents  a  heap  is  an  object  with  two  at-
tributes:A:length, which (as usual) gives the number of elements in the array, and
A:heap-size, which represents how many elements in the heap are stored within
arrayA.   That  is,  althoughAŒ1 : : A:lengthmay contain  numbers,  only  the ele-
ments inAŒ1 : : A:heap-size,where0A:heap-sizeA:length, are valid ele-
ments of the heap. The root of the tree isAŒ1, and given the indexiof a node, we
can easily compute the indices of its parent, left child, and right child:

152Chapter 6Heapsort
(a)
1614108793241
12345678910
(b)
1
23
4567
8910
16
1410
8793
241
Figure 6.1A max-heap viewed as(a)abinarytreeand(b)an array. The number within the circle
at each node in the tree is the value stored at that node. The number above a node is the corresponding
index in the array.  Above and below the array are lines showing parent-child relationships; parents
are always to the left of their children.  The tree has height three; the node at index 4 (with value 8)
has height one.
PARENT.i /
1return
b
i=2
c
L
EFT.i /
1return2i
R
IGHT.i /
1return2iC1
On  most  computers,  the  L
EFTprocedure  can  compute2iin  one  instruction  by
simply shifting the binary representation ofileft by one bit position. Similarly, the
R
IGHTprocedure can quickly compute2iC1by shifting the binary representation
ofileft  by  one  bit  position  and  then  adding  in  a1as  the  low-order  bit.   The
P
ARENTprocedure can compute
b
i=2
c
by shiftingiright one bit position.  Good
implementations of heapsort often implement these procedures as “macros” or “in-
line” procedures.
There are two kinds of binary heaps:  max-heaps and min-heaps.  In both kinds,
the values in the nodes satisfy aheap property, the specifics of which depend on
the kind of heap.  In amax-heap,themax-heap propertyis that for every nodei
other than the root,
AŒP
ARENT.i /AŒi  ;
that  is,  the value  of a node  is at  most  the value  of  its parent.   Thus,  the largest
element in a max-heap is stored at the root, and the subtree rooted at a node contains

6.1Heaps153
values no larger than that contained at the node itself. Amin-heapis organized in
the opposite way;  themin-heap propertyis that for every nodeiother than the
root,
AŒP
ARENT.i /AŒi  :
The smallest element in a min-heap is at the root.
For the heapsort  algorithm,  we use max-heaps.   Min-heaps  commonly imple-
ment  priority  queues,  which  we  discuss  in  Section  6.5.   We  shall  be  precise  in
specifying whether we need a max-heap or a min-heap for any particular applica-
tion, and when properties apply to either max-heaps or min-heaps, we just use the
term “heap.”
Viewing a heap as a tree,  we define theheightof a node in a heap to be the
number of edges on the longest simple downward path from the node to a leaf, and
we define the height of the heap to be the height of its root. Since a heap ofnele-
ments is based on a complete binary tree, its height is‚.lgn/(see Exercise 6.1-2).
We shall see that the basic operations on heaps run in time at most proportional
to the height of the tree and thus takeO.lgn/time.  The remainder of this chapter
presents some basic procedures and shows how they are used in a sorting algorithm
and a priority-queue data structure.

The MAX-HEAPIFYprocedure, which runs inO.lgn/time, is the key to main-
taining the max-heap property.

The BUILD-MAX-HEAPprocedure, which runs in linear time, produces a max-
heap from an unordered input array.

The  HEAPSORTprocedure,  which  runs  inO.nlgn/time,  sorts  an  array  in
place.

The  MAX-HEAP-INSERT,HEAP-EXTRACT-MAX,HEAP-INCREASE-KEY,
and H
EAP-MAXIMUMprocedures, which run inO.lgn/time, allow the heap
data structure to implement a priority queue.
Exercises
6.1-1
What are the minimum and maximum numbers of elements in a heap of heighth?
6.1-2
Show that ann-element heap has height
b
lgn
c
.
6.1-3
Show that in any subtree of a max-heap, the root of the subtree contains the largest
value occurrin
ganywhere in that subtree.

154Chapter 6Heapsort
6.1-4
Where in a max-heap might the smallest element reside, assuming that all elements
are distinct?
6.1-5
Is an array that is in sorted order a min-heap?
6.1-6
Is the array with valuesh23; 17; 14; 6; 13; 10; 1; 5; 7; 12ia max-heap?
6.1-7
Show that, with the array representation for storing ann-element heap, the leaves
are the nodes indexed by
b
n=2
c
C1;
b
n=2
c
C2;:::;n.
6.2  Maintaining the heap property
In order to maintain the max-heap property, we call the procedure MAX-HEAPIFY.
Its inputs are an arrayAandanindexiinto the array.  When it is called,  M
AX-
H
EAPIFYassumes that the binary trees rooted at LEFT.i /and RIGHT.i /are max-
heaps, but thatAŒi might be smaller than its children, thus violating the max-heap
property.  M
AX-HEAPIFYlets the value atAŒi “float down” in the max-heap so
that the subtree rooted at indexiobeys the max-heap property.
M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; i /
1lDL
EFT.i /
2rDR
IGHT.i /
3iflA:heap-sizeandAŒl  > AŒi 
4largestDl
5elselargestDi
6ifrA:heap-sizeandAŒr  > AŒlargest
7largestDr
8iflargest¤i
9exchangeAŒi withAŒlargest
10M
AX-HEAPIFY.A;largest/
Figure 6.2 illustrates the action of M
AX-HEAPIFY.  At each step, the largest of
the elementsAŒi ,AŒL
EFT.i /,andAŒRIGHT.i /is determined,  and its index is
stored inlargest.IfAŒi is largest, then the subtree rooted at nodeiis already a
max-heap and the procedure terminates. Otherwise, one of the two children has the
largest element, andAŒi is swapped withAŒlargest, which causes nodeiand its

6.2Maintaining the heap property155
16
410
1479
281
(a)
16
1410
4793
281
(b)
16
1410
8793
241
(c)
3
1
3
4567
910
2
8
1
3
4567
910
2
8
1
3
4567
910
2
8
i
i
i
Figure 6.2The action of  MAX-HEAPIFY.A; 2/,whereA:heap-sizeD10.(a)The initial con-
figuration,  withAŒ2at  nodeiD2violating  the  max-heap  property  since  it  is  not  larger  than
both children.  The max-heap property is restored for node2in(b)by exchangingAŒ2withAŒ4,
which destroys  the max-heap  property for node4.   The recursive call  M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; 4/now
hasiD4. After swappingAŒ4withAŒ9,asshownin(c), node4is fixed up, and the recursive call
M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; 9/yields no further change to the data structure.
children to satisfy the max-heap property.  The node indexed bylargest,however,
now has the original valueAŒi , and thus the subtree rooted atlargestmight violate
the max-heap property.  Consequently, we call M
AX-HEAPIFYrecursively on that
subtree.
The running  time of  M
AX-HEAPIFYon a subtree  of sizenrooted  at a given
nodeiis  the‚.1/time  to  fix  up  the  relationships  among  the  elementsAŒi ,
AŒL
EFT.i /,andAŒRIGHT.i /, plus the time to run MAX-HEAPIFYon a subtree
rooted at one of the children of nodei(assuming that the recursive call occurs).
The children’s subtrees each have size at most2n=3—the worst case occurs when
the bottom level of the tree is exactly half full—and therefore we can describe the
running time of M
AX-HEAPIFYby the recurrence
T .n/T .2n=3/C‚.1/ :

156Chapter 6Heapsort
The solution to this recurrence,  by case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1),
isT .n/DO.lgn/.  Alternatively, we can characterize the running time of M
AX-
H
EAPIFYon a node of heighthasO.h/.
Exercises
6.2-1
Using Figure 6.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; 3/on
the arrayADh27; 17; 3; 16; 13; 10; 1; 5; 7; 12; 4; 8; 9; 0i.
6.2-2
Starting with the procedure M
AX-HEAPIFY,  write pseudocode for the procedure
M
IN-HEAPIFY.A; i /, which performs the corresponding  manipulation on a min-
heap.   How  does  the  running  time of  M
IN-HEAPIFYcompare  to  that  of  MAX-
H
EAPIFY?
6.2-3
What is the effect of calling M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; i /when the elementAŒi is larger
than its children?
6.2-4
What is the effect of calling M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; i /fori>A:heap-size=2?
6.2-5
The code for M
AX-HEAPIFYis quite efficient in terms of constant factors, except
possibly  for the recursive  call  in line 10,  which might cause  some compilers  to
produce inefficient code.  Write an efficient M
AX-HEAPIFYthat uses an iterative
control construct (a loop) instead of recursion.
6.2-6
Show  that  the  worst-case  running  time  of  M
AX-HEAPIFYon  a  heap  of  sizen
is.lgn/.(Hint:For a heap withnnodes,  give node  values  that  cause  M
AX-
H
EAPIFYto be called recursively  at  every node on a simple path from  the root
down to a leaf.)
6.3  Building a heap
We can use the procedure  MAX-HEAPIFYin a bottom-up manner to convert  an
arrayAŒ1 : : n,wherenDA:length,  into  a  max-heap.   By Exercise  6.1-7,  the
elements in the subarrayAŒ.
b
n=2
c
C1/::nare all leaves of the tree, and so each is

6.3Building a heap157
a1-element heap to begin with.  The procedure BUILD-MAX-HEAPgoes through
the remaining nodes of the tree and runs M
AX-HEAPIFYon each one.
B
UILD-MAX-HEAP.A/
1A:heap-sizeDA:length
2foriD
b
A:length=2
c
downto1
3M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; i /
Figure 6.3 shows an example of the action of B
UILD-MAX-HEAP.
To  show  w hy  B
UILD-MAX-HEAPworks correctly,  we use the following loop
invariant:
At the start of each iteration of theforloop of lines 2–3, each nodeiC1;
iC2;:::;nis the root of a max-heap.
We need to show that this invariant is true prior to the first loop iteration, that each
iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, and that the invariant provides a useful
property to show correctness when the loop terminates.
Initialization:Prior  to  the  first  iteration  of  the  loop,iD
b
n=2
c
.   Each  node
b
n=2
c
C1;
b
n=2
c
C2;:::;nis a leaf and is thus the root of a trivial max-heap.
Maintenance:To see that each iteration maintains the loop invariant, observe that
the children of nodeiare numbered higher thani. By the loop invariant, there-
fore, they are both roots of max-heaps. This is precisely the condition required
for the call M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; i /to make nodeia max-heap root.  Moreover,
the M
AX-HEAPIFYcall preserves the property that nodesiC1; iC2;:::;n
are all roots of max-heaps. Decrementingiin theforloop update reestablishes
the loop invariant for the next iteration.
Termination:At termination,iD0. By the loop invariant, each node1;2;:::;n
is the root of a max-heap. In particular, node1is.
We can compute a simple upper bound on the running  time of  B
UILD-MAX-
H
EAPas follows.  Each call to MAX-HEAPIFYcostsO.lgn/time, and BUILD-
M
AX-HEAPmakesO.n/such calls.   Thus,  the running  time isO.nlgn/.This
upper bound, though correct, is not asymptotically tight.
We can derive a tighter bound by observing that the time for M
AX-HEAPIFYto
run at a node varies with the height of the node in the tree, and the heights of most
nodes are small. Our tighter analysis relies on the properties that ann-element heap
has height
b
lgn
c
(see Exercise 6.1-2) and at most
 ̇
n=2
hC1

nodes of any heighth
(see Exercise 6.3-3).
The time required by M
AX-HEAPIFYwhen called on a node of heighthisO.h/,
and so we can express the total cost of B
UILD-MAX-HEAPas being bounded from
above by

158Chapter 6Heapsort
1
23
4567
8910
1
23
4567
8910
1
23
4567
8910
1
23
4567
8910
1
23
4567
8910
1
23
4567
8910
4
13
2910
1487
(a)
16
412316   9   10  14   8    7
4
13
2910
1487
(b)
16
4
13
14910
287
(c)
16
4
110
1493
287
(d)
16
4
1610
1493
281
(e)
7
16
1410
893
241
(f)
7
A
ii
ii
i
Figure 6.3The  operation  of  BUILD-MAX-HEAP, showing  the  data  structure  before  the  call  to
M
AX-HEAPIFYin  line  3  of  BUILD-MAX-HEAP.(a)A  10-element  input  arrayAand  the  bi-
nary  tree  it  represents.   The  figure  shows  that  the  loop  indexirefers  to  node5before  the  call
M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; i /.(b)The data structure that results.  The loop indexifor the next iteration
refers to node4.(c)–(e)Subsequent iterations of theforloop in B
UILD-MAX-HEAP. Observe that
whenever  M
AX-HEAPIFYis called on a node,  the two subtrees of that node are both max-heaps.
(f)The max-heap after B
UILD-MAX-HEAPfinishes.

6.4The heapsort algorithm159
blgnc
X
hD0
l
n
2
hC1
m
O.h/DO
 
n
blgnc
X
hD0
h
2
h
!
:
We evalaute  the  last  summation  by  substitutingxD1=2in the  formula  (A.8),
yielding
1
X
hD0
h
2
h
D
1=2
.11=2/
2
D2:
Thus, we can bound the running time of B
UILD-MAX-HEAPas
O
 
n
blgnc
X
hD0
h
2
h
!
DO
 
n
1
X
hD0
h
2
h
!
DO.n/ :
Hence, we can build a max-heap from an unordered array in linear time.
We can  build  a  min-heap  by  the  procedure  B
UILD-MIN-HEAP,  which  is  the
same as B
UILD-MAX-HEAPbut with the call to MAX-HEAPIFYin line 3 replaced
by a call to M
IN-HEAPIFY(see Exercise 6.2-2).  BUILD-MIN-HEAPproduces a
min-heap from an unordered linear array in linear time.
Exercises
6.3-1
Using Figure 6.3 as a model, illustrate the operation of B
UILD-MAX-HEAPon the
arrayADh5; 3; 17; 10; 84; 19; 6; 22; 9i.
6.3-2
Why do we want the loop indexiin line 2 of B
UILD-MAX-HEAPto decrease from
b
A:length=2
c
to1rather than increase from1to
b
A:length=2
c
?
6.3-3
Show that there are at most
 ̇
n=2
hC1

nodes of heighthin anyn-element heap.
6.4  The heapsort algorithm
The heapsort algorithm starts by using  BUILD-MAX-HEAPto build a max-heap
on the input arrayAŒ1 : : n,wherenDA:length.  Since the maximum element
of the array is stored at the rootAŒ1, we can put it into its correct final position

160Chapter 6Heapsort
by exchanging  it withAŒn.  If we now discard  nodenfrom the heap—and  we
can do so by simply decrementingA:heap-size—we observe that the children of
the root remain max-heaps, but the new root element might violate the max-heap
property.   All we need  to  do  to  restore  the  max-heap  property,  however,  is  call
M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; 1/,  which leaves  a max-heap  inAŒ1 : : n1.   The heapsort
algorithm then repeats this process for the max-heap of sizen1down to a heap
of size2. (See Exercise 6.4-2 for a precise loop invariant.)
H
EAPSORT.A/
1B
UILD-MAX-HEAP.A/
2foriDA:lengthdownto2
3exchangeAŒ1withAŒi 
4A:heap-sizeDA:heap-size1
5M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; 1/
Figure 6.4 shows an example of the operation of H
EAPSORTafter line 1 has built
the initial max-heap.  The figure shows the max-heap before the first iteration of
theforloop of lines 2–5 and after each iteration.
The H
EAPSORTprocedure takes timeO.nlgn/, since the call to BUILD-MAX-
H
EAPtakes  timeO.n/and  each  of  then1calls  to  MAX-HEAPIFYtakes
timeO.lgn/.
Exercises
6.4-1
Using Figure 6.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of H
EAPSORTon the array
ADh5; 13; 2; 25; 7; 17; 20; 8; 4i.
6.4-2
Argue the correctness of H
EAPSORTusing the following loop invariant:
At  the  start  of  each  iteration  of  theforloop  of  lines  2–5,  the  subarray
AŒ1 : : i is a max-heap containing theismallest elements ofAŒ1 : : n,and
the subarrayAŒiC1::ncontains thenilargest elements ofAŒ1 : : n,
sorted.
6.4-3
What is the running time of H
EAPSORTon an arrayAof lengthnthat is already
sorted in increasing order? What about decreasing order?
6.4-4
Show that the worst-case running time of H
EAPSORTis.nlgn/.

6.4The heapsort algorithm161
(a)(b)(c)
(d)(e)(f)
(g)(h)(i)
(j)(k)
1234789101416
10
2
13
4789
1614
1
23
4789
161410
3
21
9874
10    14    16
4
23
9871
10    14    16
8
37
4219
161410
7
43
9821
10    14    16
9
83
2174
161410
10
89
3174
16142
14
810
3974
1612
16
1410
3978
142
A
i
i
i
ii
ii
i
i
Figure 6.4The operation of HEAPSORT.(a)The max-heap data structure just after BUILD-MAX-
H
EAPhas built it in line 1.(b)–(j)The max-heap just after each call of MAX-HEAPIFYin line 5,
showing the value ofiat that time. Only lightly shaded nodes remain in the heap.(k)The resulting
sorted arrayA.

162Chapter 6Heapsort
6.4-5?
Show that when all elements are distinct, the best-case running time of H
EAPSORT
is.nlgn/.
6.5  Priority queues
Heapsort is an excellent algorithm, but a good implementation of quicksort,  pre-
sented in Chapter 7, usually beats it in practice.  Nevertheless, the heap data struc-
ture itself has many uses.  In this section, we present one of the most popular ap-
plications of a heap:  as an efficient priority queue.  As with heaps, priority queues
come in two forms:  max-priority queues and min-priority queues.  We will focus
here on how to implement max-priority queues, which are in turn based on max-
heaps; Exercise 6.5-3 asks you to write the procedures for min-priority queues.
Apriority queueis a data structure for maintaining a setSof elements,  each
with an associated value called akey.Amax-priority queuesupports the following
operations:
I
NSERT.S; x/inserts the elementxinto the setS, which is equivalent to the oper-
ationSDS[
f
x
g
.
M
AXIMUM.S /returns the element ofSwith the largest key.
E
XTRACT-MAX.S /removes and returns the element ofSwith the largest key.
I
NCREASE-KEY.S;x;k/increases the value of elementx’s key to the new valuek,
which is assumed to be at least as large asx’s current key value.
Among  their  other  applications,  we  can  use  max-priority  queues  to  schedule
jobs  on  a  shared  computer.   The  max-priority  queue  keeps  track  of  the  jobs  to
be performed and their relative priorities.  When a job is finished or interrupted,
the scheduler selects the highest-priority job from among those pending by calling
E
XTRACT-MAX.   The scheduler  can add a new job to the queue at any time by
calling I
NSERT.
Alternatively, amin-priority queuesupports the operations I
NSERT,MINIMUM,
E
XTRACT-MIN,andDECREASE-KEY.   A min-priority  queue can be used in an
event-driven  simulator.  The items in the queue are events to be simulated,  each
with an associated time of occurrence that serves as its key.  The events must be
simulated in order of their time of occurrence, because the simulation of an event
can cause other events to be simulated in the future. The simulation program calls
E
XTRACT-MINat each step to choose the next event to simulate. As new events are
produced, the simulator inserts them into the min-priority queue by calling I
NSERT.

6.5Priority queues163
We shall see other uses for min-priority queues, highlighting the DECREASE-KEY
operation, in Chapters 23 and 24.
Not surprisingly, we can use a heap to implement a priority queue. In a given ap-
plication, such as job scheduling or event-driven simulation, elements of a priority
queue correspond to objects in the application.  We often need to determine which
application object corresponds to a given priority-queue element, and vice versa.
When we use a heap to implement a priority queue,  therefore,  we often need to
store ahandleto the corresponding application object in each heap element.  The
exact makeup of the handle (such as a pointer or an integer) depends on the ap-
plication.  Similarly, we need to store a handle to the corresponding heap element
in each  application  object.   Here,  the handle  would typically  be an array  index.
Because heap elements change locations within the array during heap operations,
an actual implementation, upon relocating a heap element, would also have to up-
date the array index in the corresponding application object.  Because the details
of accessing application objects depend heavily on the application and its imple-
mentation, we shall not pursue them here, other than noting that in practice, these
handles do need to be correctly maintained.
Now we discuss how to implement the operations of a max-priority queue. The
procedure H
EAP-MAXIMUMimplements the MAXIMUMoperation in‚.1/time.
H
EAP-MAXIMUM.A/
1returnAŒ1
The procedure H
EAP-EXTRACT-MAXimplements the EXTRACT-MAXopera-
tion. It is similar to theforloop body (lines 3–5) of the H
EAPSORTprocedure.
H
EAP-EXTRACT-MAX.A/
1ifA:heap-size<1
2error“heap underflow”
3maxDAŒ1
4AŒ1DAŒA:heap-size
5A:heap-sizeDA:heap-size1
6M
AX-HEAPIFY.A; 1/
7returnmax
The running time of H
EAP-EXTRACT-MAXisO.lgn/, since it performs only a
constant amount of work on top of theO.lgn/time for M
AX-HEAPIFY.
The procedure H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYimplements the INCREASE-KEYopera-
tion. An indexiinto the array identifies the priority-queue element whose key we
wish to increase.  The procedure first updates the key of elementAŒi to its new
value.  Because increasing  the key ofAŒi might violate the max-heap property,

164Chapter 6Heapsort
the procedure  then,  in a manner reminiscent  of the insertion  loop (lines 5–7) of
I
NSERTION-SORTfrom Section 2.1, traverses a simple path from this node toward
the root to find a proper place for the newly increased key.  As H
EAP-INCREASE-
K
EYtraverses this path, it repeatedly compares an element to its parent, exchang-
ing their keys and continuing if the element’s key is larger, and terminating if the el-
ement’s key is smaller, since the max-heap property now holds. (See Exercise 6.5-5
for a precise loop invariant.)
H
EAP-INCREASE-KEY.A; i;key/
1ifkey< AŒi 
2error“new key is smaller than current key”
3AŒi Dkey
4whilei>1andAŒP
ARENT.i / < AŒi 
5exchangeAŒi withAŒP
ARENT.i /
6iDP
ARENT.i /
Figure 6.5 shows an example of a H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYoperation.  The running
time of H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYon ann-element heap isO.lgn/, since the path
traced from the node updated in line 3 to the root has lengthO.lgn/.
The procedure M
AX-HEAP-INSERTimplements the INSERToperation. It takes
as an input the key of the new element to be inserted into max-heapA. The proce-
dure first expands the max-heap by adding to the tree a new leaf whose key is1.
Then it calls H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYto set the key of this new node to its correct
value and maintain the max-heap property.
M
AX-HEAP-INSERT.A;key/
1A:heap-sizeDA:heap-sizeC1
2AŒA:heap-sizeD1
3H
EAP-INCREASE-KEY.A; A:heap-size;key/
The running time of M
AX-HEAP-INSERTon ann-element heap isO.lgn/.
In summary, a heap can support any priority-queue operation on a set of sizen
inO.lgn/time.
Exercises
6.5-1
Illustrate the operation of H
EAP-EXTRACT-MAXon the heapADh15; 13; 9; 5;
12;8;7;4;0;6;2;1i.

6.5Priority queues165
16
1410
8793
241
(a)
i
16
1410
8793
2
15
1
(b)
16
1410
8
793
2
15
1
(c)
i
i
16
14
10
8
793
2
15
1
(d)
i
Figure 6.5The operation of HEAP-INCREASE-KEY.(a)The max-heap of Figure 6.4(a) with a
node  whose  index  isiheavily shaded.(b)This node  has  its key increased  to15.(c)After one
iteration of thewhileloop of lines 4–6, the node and its parent have exchanged keys, and the indexi
moves up to the parent.(d)The max-heap after one more iteration of thewhileloop.  At this point,
AŒP
ARENT.i /AŒi . The max-heap property now holds and the procedure terminates.
6.5-2
Illustrate the operation of M
AX-HEAP-INSERT.A; 10/on the heapADh15; 13; 9;
5;12;8;7;4;0;6;2;1i.
6.5-3
Write  pseudocode  for  the  procedures  H
EAP-MINIMUM,HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN,
H
EAP-DECREASE-KEY,andMIN-HEAP-INSERTthat implement a min-priority
queue with a min-heap.
6.5-4
Why do we bother setting the key of the inserted node to1in line 2 of M
AX-
H
EAP-INSERTwhen the next thing we do is increase its key to the desired value?

166Chapter 6Heapsort
6.5-5
Argue the correctness of H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYusing the following loop invari-
ant:
At the start of each iteration  of thewhileloop of lines 4–6,  the subarray
AŒ1 : : A:heap-sizesatisfies the max-heap property,  except that there may
be one violation:AŒi may be larger thanAŒP
ARENT.i /.
You may assume that the subarrayAŒ1 : : A:heap-sizesatisfies the max-heap prop-
erty at the time H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYis called.
6.5-6
Each exchange  operation  on line 5 of  H
EAP-INCREASE-KEYtypically  requires
three  assignments.   Show how to use the idea of  the inner  loop  of  I
NSERTION-
S
ORTto reduce the three assignments down to just one assignment.
6.5-7
Show  how  to implement  a  first-in,  first-out  queue  with  a priority  queue.   Show
how to implement a stack with a priority queue. (Queues and stacks are defined in
Section 10.1.)
6.5-8
The operation H
EAP-DELETE.A; i /deletes the item in nodeifrom heapA.Give
an implementation of H
EAP-DELETEthat runs inO.lgn/time for ann-element
max-heap.
6.5-9
Give  anO.nlgk/-time  algorithm  to  mergeksorted  lists  into  one  sorted  list,
wherenis the total number of elements in all the input lists.  (Hint:Use a min-
heap fork-way merging.)
Problems
6-1  Building a heap using insertion
We can build a heap by repeatedly calling M
AX-HEAP-INSERTto insert the ele-
ments into the heap.  Consider the following variation on the B
UILD-MAX-HEAP
procedure:

Problems for Chapter 6167
BUILD-MAX-HEAP
0
.A/
1A:heap-sizeD1
2foriD2toA:length
3M
AX-HEAP-INSERT.A; AŒi /
a.Do the procedures B
UILD-MAX-HEAPand BUILD-MAX-HEAP
0
always create
the same heap when run on the same input array? Prove that they do, or provide
a counterexample.
b.Show that  in the worst  case,  B
UILD-MAX-HEAP
0
requires‚.nlgn/time to
build ann-element heap.
6-2  Analysis ofd-ary heaps
Ad-ary heapis like  a  binary  heap,  but  (with one  possible  exception)  non-leaf
nodes havedchildren instead of2children.
a.How would you represent ad-ary heap in an array?
b.What is the height of ad-ary heap ofnelements in terms ofnandd?
c.Give an efficient implementation of E
XTRACT-MAXin ad-ary max-heap. An-
alyze its running time in terms ofdandn.
d.Give an efficient implementation of I
NSERTin ad-ary max-heap.  Analyze its
running time in terms ofdandn.
e.Give an efficient implementation  of  I
NCREASE-KEY.A;i;k/,  which flags an
error ifk < AŒi , but otherwise setsAŒi Dkand then updates thed-ary max-
heap structure appropriately. Analyze its running time in terms ofdandn.
6-3  Young tableaus
Anm	nYoung tableauis anm	nmatrix such that the entries of each row are
in sorted order from left to right and the entries of each column are in sorted order
from top to bottom.  Some of the entries of a Young tableau may be1,whichwe
treat as nonexistent elements.  Thus, a Young tableau can be used to holdrmn
finite numbers.
a.Draw a4	4Young tableau containing the elements
f
9; 16; 3; 2; 4; 8; 5; 14; 12
g
.
b.Argue that anm	nYoung tableauYis empty ifY Œ1; 1D1.  Argue thatY
is full (containsmnelements) ifYŒm;n<1.

168Chapter 6Heapsort
c.Give an algorithm to implement EXTRACT-MINon a nonemptym	nYoung
tableau  that  runs  inO.mCn/time.    Your  algorithm  should  use  a  recur-
sive  subroutine  that  solves  anm	nproblem  by  recursively  solving  either
an.m1/	nor  anm	.n1/subproblem.    (Hint:Think  about  M
AX-
H
EAPIFY.) DefineT.p/,wherepDmCn, to be the maximum running time
of E
XTRACT-MINon anym	nYoung tableau.  Give and solve a recurrence
forT.p/that yields theO.mCn/time bound.
d.Show  how  to  insert  a  new  element  into  a  nonfullm	nYoung  tableau  in
O.mCn/time.
e.Using no other sorting method as a subroutine, show how to use ann	nYoung
tableau to sortn
2
numbers inO.n
3
/time.
f.Give  anO.mCn/-time  algorithm  to  determine  whether  a  given  number  is
stored in a givenm	nYoung tableau.
Chapter notes
The heapsort algorithm was invented by Williams [357], who also described how
to implement a priority  queue with a heap.   The  B
UILD-MAX-HEAPprocedure
was suggested by Floyd [106].
We use min-heaps to implement min-priority queues in Chapters 16, 23, and 24.
We also give an implementation with improved time bounds for certain operations
in Chapter 19 and, assuming that the keys are drawn from a bounded set of non-
negative integers, Chapter 20.
If the data areb-bit integers, and the computer memory consists of addressable
b-bit words, Fredman and Willard [115] showed how to implement M
INIMUMin
O.1/time and I
NSERTand EXTRACT-MINinO.
p
lgn/time.  Thorup [337] has
improved theO.
p
lgn/bound toO.lg lgn/time.  This bound uses an amount of
space unbounded inn, but it can be implemented in linear space by using random-
ized hashing.
An  important  special  case  of  priority  queues  occurs  when  the  sequence  of
E
XTRACT-MINoperations  ismonotone,  that  is,  the  values  returned  by  succes-
sive E
XTRACT-MINoperations are monotonically increasing over time. This case
arises in several important applications, such as Dijkstra’s single-source shortest-
paths  algorithm,  which  we discuss  in Chapter  24,  and  in discrete-event  simula-
tion. For Dijkstra’s algorithm it is particularly important that the D
ECREASE-KEY
operation be implemented efficiently.  For the monotone case,  if the data are in-
tegers in the range1;2;:::;C, Ahuja,  Mehlhorn,  Orlin, and Tarjan [8] describe

Notes for Chapter 6169
how  to  implement  EXTRACT-MINand  INSERTinO.lgC/amortized  time (see
Chapter 17 for more on amortized analysis) and D
ECREASE-KEYinO.1/time,
using a data structure called a radix heap.  TheO.lgC/bound can be improved
toO.
p
lgC/using  Fibonacci  heaps  (see  Chapter  19)  in conjunction  with radix
heaps.  Cherkassky, Goldberg, and Silverstein [65] further improved the bound to
O.lg
1=3C
C/expected  time  by  combining  the  multilevel  bucketing  structure  of
Denardo and Fox [85] with the heap of Thorup mentioned earlier.  Raman [291]
further improved these results to obtain a bound ofO.min.lg
1=4C
C;lg
1=3C
n//,
for any fixed>0.

7Quicksort
The quicksort algorithm has a worst-case running time of‚.n
2
/on an input array
ofnnumbers. Despite this slow worst-case running time, quicksort is often the best
practical choice for sorting because it is remarkably efficient on the average:  its
expected running time is‚.nlgn/, and the constant factors hidden in the‚.nlgn/
notation are quite small. It also has the advantage of sorting in place (see page 17),
and it works well even in virtual-memory environments.
Section 7.1 describes the algorithm and an important subroutine used by quick-
sort for partitioning.  Because the behavior of quicksort is complex, we start with
an intuitive discussion of its performance in Section 7.2 and postpone its precise
analysis to the end of the chapter.  Section 7.3 presents a version of quicksort that
uses random sampling.  This algorithm has a good expected running time, and no
particular input elicits its worst-case behavior.  Section 7.4 analyzes the random-
ized algorithm, showing that it runs in‚.n
2
/time in the worst case and, assuming
distinct elements, in expectedO.nlgn/time.
7.1  Description of quicksort
Quicksort,  like  merge  sort,  applies  the  divide-and-conquer  paradigm  introduced
in Section 2.3.1.  Here is the three-step divide-and-conquer  process for sorting a
typical subarrayAŒp : : r :
Divide:Partition (rearrange) the arrayAŒp : : r into two (possibly empty) subar-
raysAŒp : : q1andAŒqC1::rsuch that each element ofAŒp  : : q1is
less than or equal toAŒq, which is, in turn, less than or equal to each element
ofAŒqC1::r. Compute the indexqas part of this partitioning procedure.
Conquer:Sort the two subarraysAŒp : : q1andAŒqC1::rby recursive calls
to quicksort.

7.1Description of quicksort171
Combine:Because the subarrays are already sorted, no work is needed to combine
them: the entire arrayAŒp : : r is now sorted.
The following procedure implements quicksort:
Q
UICKSORT.A;p;r/
1ifp<r
2qDP
ARTITION.A;p;r/
3Q
UICKSORT.A;p;q1/
4Q
UICKSORT.A; qC1; r /
To sort an entire arrayA, the initial call is Q
UICKSORT.A;1;A:length/.
Partitioning the array
The key to the algorithm is the P
ARTITIONprocedure, which rearranges the subar-
rayAŒp : : r in place.
P
ARTITION.A;p;r/
1xDAŒr 
2iDp1
3forjDptor1
4ifAŒj x
5iDiC1
6exchangeAŒi withAŒj 
7exchangeAŒiC1withAŒr 
8returniC1
Figure7.1showshowP
ARTITIONworks on an8-element  array.   PARTITION
always selects an elementxDAŒr as apivotelement around which to partition the
subarrayAŒp : : r . As the procedure runs, it partitions the array into four (possibly
empty) regions. At the start of each iteration of theforloop in lines 3–6, the regions
satisfy certain properties, shown in Figure 7.2. We state these properties as a loop
invariant:
At the beginning  of each iteration  of the loop of lines 3–6,  for any array
indexk,
1. Ifpki,thenAŒkx.
2. IfiC1kj1,thenAŒk > x.
3. IfkDr,thenAŒkDx.

172Chapter 7Quicksort
28713564
p,jri
(a)
28713564
p,irj
(b)
28713564
p,irj
(c)
28713564
p,irj
(d)
28713564
prj
(e)
i
28713564
prj
(f)
i
28713564
prj
(g)
i
28713564
pr
(h)
i
28713564
pr
(i)
i
Figure 7.1The operation of PARTITIONon a sample array.  Array entryAŒr becomes the pivot
elementx.  Lightly shaded array elements are all in the first partition with values no greater thanx.
Heavily shaded elements are in the second partition with values greater thanx.  The unshaded el-
ements have not yet been put in one of the first two partitions,  and the final white element is the
pivotx.(a)The initial array and variable settings.  None of the elements have been placed in either
of the first two partitions.(b)The value2is “swapped with itself” and put in the partition of smaller
values.(c)–(d)The values8and7are added to the partition of larger values.(e)The values1and8
are swapped, and the smaller partition grows.(f)The values3and7are swapped, and the smaller
partition grows.(g)–(h)The larger partition grows to include5and6, and the loop terminates.(i)In
lines 7–8, the pivot element is swapped so that it lies between the two partitions.
The indices betweenjandr1are not covered by any of the three cases, and the
values in these entries have no particular relationship to the pivotx.
We need to show that this loop invariant is true prior to the first iteration,  that
each iteration of the loop maintains the invariant, and that the invariant provides a
useful property to show correctness when the loop terminates.

7.1Description of quicksort173
≤x>xunrestricted
x
pijr
Figure 7.2The four regions maintained by the procedure PARTITIONon a subarrayAŒp : : r .The
values inAŒp : : i are all less than or equal tox,thevaluesinAŒiC1::j1are all greater thanx,
andAŒr Dx. The subarrayAŒj ::r1can take on any values.
Initialization:Prior to the first iteration of the loop,iDp1andjDp.Be-
cause no values lie betweenpandiand no values lie betweeniC1andj1,
the first two conditions of the loop invariant are trivially satisfied.  The assign-
ment in line 1 satisfies the third condition.
Maintenance:As  Figure  7.3  shows,  we  consider  two  cases,  depending  on  the
outcome of the test in line 4. Figure 7.3(a) shows what happens whenAŒj  > x;
the only action in the loop is to incrementj. Afterjis incremented, condition 2
holds forAŒj1and all other entries remain unchanged. Figure 7.3(b) shows
what happens  whenAŒj x;  the loop incrementsi,swapsAŒi andAŒj ,
and then incrementsj.  Because of the swap, we now have thatAŒi x,and
condition1is satisfied.  Similarly, we also have thatAŒj1 > x, since the
item that was swapped intoAŒj1is, by the loop invariant, greater thanx.
Termination:At termination,jDr. Therefore, every entry in the array is in one
of the three sets described by the invariant, and we have partitioned the values
in the array into three sets:  those less than or equal tox, those greater thanx,
and a singleton set containingx.
The final two lines of P
ARTITIONfinish up by swapping the pivot element with
the leftmost element greater thanx, thereby moving the pivot into its correct place
in the partitioned array,  and then returning the pivot’s new index.  The output of
P
ARTITIONnow satisfies  the specifications  given  for  the divide  step.   In fact,  it
satisfies a slightly stronger condition:  after line 2 of Q
UICKSORT,AŒqis strictly
less than every element ofAŒqC1::r.
The  running  time  of  P
ARTITIONon  the  subarrayAŒp : : r is‚.n/,where
nDrpC1(see Exercise 7.1-3).
Exercises
7.1-1
Using Figure 7.1 as a model, illustrate the operation of P
ARTITIONon the array
ADh13; 19; 9; 5; 12; 8; 7; 4; 21; 2; 6; 11i.

174Chapter 7Quicksort
≤x>x
x
pijr
>x(a)
≤x>x
x
pijr
≤x>x
x
pijr
≤x(b)
≤x>x
x
pijr
Figure 7.3The two cases for one iteration of procedure  PARTITION.(a)IfAŒj   >  x, the only
action is to incrementj, which maintains the loop invariant.(b)IfAŒj x, indexiis incremented,
AŒi andAŒj are swapped, and thenjis incremented. Again, the loop invariant is maintained.
7.1-2
What value ofqdoes P
ARTITIONreturn when all elements in the arrayAŒp : : r 
have  the  same  value?   Modify  P
ARTITIONso  thatqD
b
.pCr/=2
c
when  all
elements in the arrayAŒp : : r have the same value.
7.1-3
Give a brief argument that the running time of P
ARTITIONon a subarray of sizen
is‚.n/.
7.1-4
How would you modify Q
UICKSORTto sort into nonincreasing order?
7.2  Performance of quicksort
The running time of quicksort depends on whether the partitioning is balanced or
unbalanced,  which in turn depends  on which elements are used for partitioning.
If the partitioning is balanced, the algorithm runs asymptotically as fast as merge

7.2Performance of quicksort175
sort. If the partitioning is unbalanced, however, it can run asymptotically as slowly
as  insertion  sort.   In  this  section,  we shall  informally  investigate  how  quicksort
performs under the assumptions of balanced versus unbalanced partitioning.
Worst-case partitioning
The worst-case  behavior  for quicksort  occurs when the partitioning  routine  pro-
duces one subproblem withn1elements and one with0elements.  (We prove
this claim in Section 7.4.1.) Let us assume that this unbalanced partitioning arises
in each recursive call.  The partitioning costs‚.n/time.  Since the recursive call
on an array of size0just returns,T.0/D‚.1/, and the recurrence for the running
time is
T .n/DT.n1/CT.0/C‚.n/
DT.n1/C‚.n/ :
Intuitively,  if  we  sum  the  costs  incurred  at  each  level  of  the  recursion,  we  get
an  arithmetic  series  (equation  (A.2)),  which  evaluates  to‚.n
2
/.   Indeed,  it  is
straightforward to use the substitution method to prove that the recurrenceT .n/D
T.n1/C‚.n/has the solutionT .n/D‚.n
2
/. (See Exercise 7.2-1.)
Thus, if the partitioning is maximally unbalanced at every recursive level of the
algorithm,  the running time is‚.n
2
/.  Therefore the worst-case running time of
quicksort is no better than that of insertion sort. Moreover, the‚.n
2
/running time
occurs when the input array is already completely sorted—a common situation in
which insertion sort runs inO.n/time.
Best-case partitioning
In the most even possible  split,  P
ARTITIONproduces  two subproblems,  each of
size no more thann=2, since one is of size
b
n=2
c
and one of size
d
n=2
e
1.Inthis
case, quicksort runs much faster. The recurrence for the running time is then
T .n/D2T .n=2/C‚.n/ ;
where we tolerate the sloppiness from ignoring the floor and ceiling and from sub-
tracting1. By case 2 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1), this recurrence has the
solutionT .n/D‚.nlgn/.  By equally balancing the two sides of the partition at
every level of the recursion, we get an asymptotically faster algorithm.
Balanced partitioning
The average-case running time of quicksort is much closer to the best case than to
the worst case, as the analyses in Section 7.4 will show.  The key to understand-

176Chapter 7Quicksort
n
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
cn
1
1
O.nlgn/
log
10
n
log
10=9
n
1
10
n
9
10
n
1
100
n
9
100
n
9
100
n
81
100
n
81
1000
n
729
1000
n
Figure 7.4A recursion tree for QUICKSORTin which PARTITIONalways produces a9-to-1split,
yielding a running time ofO.nlgn/. Nodes show subproblem sizes, with per-level costs on the right.
The per-level costs include the constantcimplicit in the‚.n/term.
ing  why is to  understand  how  the  balance  of  the  partitioning  is  reflected  in  the
recurrence that describes the running time.
Suppose, for example, that the partitioning algorithm always produces a9-to-1
proportional split, which at first blush seems quite unbalanced. We then obtain the
recurrence
T .n/DT .9n=10/CT .n=10/Ccn ;
on the running time of quicksort, where we have explicitly included the constantc
hidden in the‚.n/term.  Figure 7.4 shows the recursion tree for this recurrence.
Notice that every level of the tree has costcn, until the recursion reaches a bound-
ary condition at depth log
10
nD‚.lgn/, and then the levels have cost at mostcn.
The recursion terminates at depth log
10=9
nD‚.lgn/.  The total cost of quick-
sort is thereforeO.nlgn/.  Thus, with a9-to-1proportional split at every level of
recursion,  which intuitively seems quite unbalanced,  quicksort  runs inO.nlgn/
time—asymptotically the same as if the split were right down the middle.  Indeed,
even a99-to-1split yields anO.nlgn/running time. In fact, any split ofconstant
proportionality yields a recursion tree of depth‚.lgn/, where the cost at each level
isO.n/.  The running time is thereforeO.nlgn/whenever the split has constant
proportionality.

7.2Performance of quicksort177
n
0n–1
(n–1)/2 – 1(n–1)/2
n
(n–1)/2
(a)(b)
(n–1)/2
Θ(n)Θ(n)
Figure 7.5  (a)Two levels of a recursion tree for quicksort.  The partitioning at the root costsn
and produces a “bad” split: two subarrays of sizes0andn1.  The partitioning of the subarray of
sizen1costsn1and produces a “good” split: subarrays of size.n1/=21and.n1/=2.
(b)A single level of a recursion tree that is very well balanced. In both parts, the partitioning cost for
the subproblems shown with elliptical shading is‚.n/. Yet the subproblems remaining to be solved
in (a), shown with square shading, are no larger than the corresponding subproblems remaining to be
solved in (b).
Intuition for the average case
To develop a clear notion of the randomized behavior of quicksort, we must make
an assumption  about  how frequently  we expect  to encounter  the  various  inputs.
The behavior  of  quicksort  depends  on  the  relative  ordering  of  the  values  in the
array elements given as the input, and not by the particular values in the array.  As
in our probabilistic analysis of the hiring problem in Section 5.2, we will assume
for now that all permutations of the input numbers are equally likely.
When we run quicksort on a random input array, the partitioning is highly un-
likely to happen in the same way at every level, as our informal analysis has as-
sumed.  We expect  that some of the splits will be reasonably  well balanced  and
that some will be fairly unbalanced. For example, Exercise 7.2-6 asks you to show
that about 80 percent of the time P
ARTITIONproduces a split that is more balanced
than9to1, and about 20 percent of the time it produces a split that is less balanced
than9to1.
In the average case, P
ARTITIONproduces a mix of “good” and “bad” splits. In a
recursion tree for an average-case execution of P
ARTITION, the good and bad splits
are distributed  randomly throughout  the tree.  Suppose,  for the sake of intuition,
that  the good  and bad splits  alternate  levels in the tree,  and that  the good  splits
are best-case splits and the bad splits are worst-case splits.  Figure 7.5(a) shows
the splits at two consecutive levels in the recursion tree.  At the root of the tree,
the cost isnfor partitioning, and the subarrays produced have sizesn1and0:
the worst case.  At the next level, the subarray of sizen1undergoes best-case
partitioning into subarrays of size.n1/=21and.n1/=2. Let’s assume that
the boundary-condition cost is1for the subarray of size0.

178Chapter 7Quicksort
The combination of the bad split followed by the good split produces three sub-
arrays of sizes0,.n1/=21,and.n1/=2at a combined partitioning  cost
of‚.n/C‚.n1/D‚.n/.  Certainly,  this situation  is no worse than that in
Figure 7.5(b), namely a single level of partitioning that produces two subarrays of
size.n1/=2, at a cost of‚.n/.  Yet this latter situation is balanced!  Intuitively,
the‚.n1/cost of the bad split can be absorbed into the‚.n/cost of the good
split, and the resulting split is good. Thus, the running time of quicksort, when lev-
els alternate between good and bad splits, is like the running time for good splits
alone: stillO.nlgn/, but with a slightly larger constant hidden by theO-notation.
We shall give a rigorous analysis  of the expected running time of a randomized
version of quicksort in Section 7.4.2.
Exercises
7.2-1
Use the substitution method to prove that the recurrenceT .n/DT.n1/C‚.n/
has the solutionT .n/D‚.n
2
/, as claimed at the beginning of Section 7.2.
7.2-2
What is the running time of Q
UICKSORTwhen all elements of arrayAhave the
same value?
7.2-3
Show that the running time of Q
UICKSORTis‚.n
2
/when the arrayAcontains
distinct elements and is sorted in decreasing order.
7.2-4
Banks often record transactions on an account in order of the times of the transac-
tions, but many people like to receive their bank statements with checks listed in
order by check number. People usually write checks in order by check number, and
merchants usually cash them with reasonable dispatch. The problem of converting
time-of-transaction ordering to check-number ordering is therefore the problem of
sorting  almost-sorted  input.   Argue  that  the  procedure  I
NSERTION-SORTwould
tend to beat the procedure Q
UICKSORTon this problem.
7.2-5
Suppose that the splits at every level of quicksort are in the proportion1 ̨to ̨,
where0< ̨1=2is a constant. Show that the minimum depth of a leaf in the re-
cursion tree is approximatelylgn=lg ̨and the maximum depth is approximately
lgn=lg.1 ̨/. (Don’t worry about integer round-off.)

7.3A randomized version of quicksort179
7.2-6?
Argue that for any constant0< ̨1=2, the probability is approximately12 ̨
that on a random input array, P
ARTITIONproduces a split more balanced than1 ̨
to ̨.
7.3  A randomized version of quicksort
In exploring the average-case behavior of quicksort, we have made an assumption
that all permutations  of the input  numbers are equally  likely.   In an engineering
situation, however, we cannot always expect this assumption to hold.  (See Exer-
cise 7.2-4.) As we saw in Section 5.3, we can sometimes add randomization to an
algorithm in order to obtain good expected performance over all inputs. Many peo-
ple regard the resulting randomized version of quicksort as the sorting algorithm
of choice for large enough inputs.
In  Section  5.3,  we  randomized  our  algorithm  by  explicitly  permuting  the  in-
put.  We could do so for quicksort  also, but a different randomization technique,
calledrandom sampling, yields a simpler analysis.  Instead of always usingAŒr 
as the pivot, we will select a randomly chosen element from the subarrayAŒp : : r .
We  do  so  by  first  exchanging  elementAŒr with  an  element  chosen  at  random
fromAŒp : : r . By randomly sampling the rangep;:::;r, we ensure that the pivot
elementxDAŒr is equally  likely to be any of therpC1elements in the
subarray.  Because we randomly choose the pivot element, we expect the split of
the input array to be reasonably well balanced on average.
The changes  to  P
ARTITIONand  QUICKSORTare  small.   In the  new  partition
procedure, we simply implement the swap before actually partitioning:
R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION.A;p;r/
1iDR
ANDOM.p; r /
2exchangeAŒr withAŒi 
3returnP
ARTITION.A;p;r/
The new quicksort calls R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITIONin place of PARTITION:
R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT.A;p;r/
1ifp<r
2qDR
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION.A;p;r/
3R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT.A;p;q1/
4R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT.A; qC1; r /
We analyze this algorithm in the next section.

180Chapter 7Quicksort
Exercises
7.3-1
Why do we analyze the expected running time of a randomized algorithm and not
its worst-case running time?
7.3-2
When R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTruns, how many calls are made to the random-
number generator R
ANDOMin the worst case?  How about in the best case?  Give
your answer in terms of‚-notation.
7.4  Analysis of quicksort
Section 7.2 gave some intuition for the worst-case behavior of quicksort  and for
why we expect it to run quickly. In this section, we analyze the behavior of quick-
sort more rigorously.  We begin with a worst-case analysis, which applies to either
Q
UICKSORTor RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, and conclude with an analysis of the
expected running time of R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT.
7.4.1  Worst-case analysis
We saw in Section 7.2 that a worst-case split at every level of recursion in quicksort
produces a‚.n
2
/running time, which, intuitively, is the worst-case running time
of the algorithm. We now prove this assertion.
Using the substitution method (see Section 4.3), we can show that the running
time of  quicksort  isO.n
2
/.LetT .n/be the  worst-case  time for  the  procedure
Q
UICKSORTon an input of sizen. We have the recurrence
T .n/Dmax
0qn1
.T .q/CT.nq1//C‚.n/ ;(7.1)
where the parameterqranges from0ton1because the procedure P
ARTITION
produces two subproblems with total sizen1.  We guess thatT .n/cn
2
for
some constantc. Substituting this guess into recurrence (7.1), we obtain
T .n/max
0qn1
.cq
2
Cc.nq1/
2
/C‚.n/
Dcmax
0qn1
.q
2
C.nq1/
2
/C‚.n/ :
The expressionq
2
C.nq1/
2
achieves a maximum over the parameter’s
range0qn1at either endpoint.  To verify this claim, note that the second
derivative of the expression with respect toqis positive (see Exercise 7.4-3). This

7.4Analysis of quicksort181
observation  gives us the bound max
0qn1
.q
2
C.nq1/
2
/.n1/
2
D
n
2
2nC1. Continuing with our bounding ofT .n/, we obtain
T .n/cn
2
c.2n1/C‚.n/
cn
2
;
since we can pick the constantclarge enough so that thec.2n1/term dom-
inates the‚.n/term.   Thus,T .n/DO.n
2
/.   We saw in Section 7.2 a specific
case in which quicksort takes.n
2
/time:  when partitioning is unbalanced.  Al-
ternatively, Exercise 7.4-1 asks you to show that recurrence (7.1) has a solution of
T .n/D.n
2
/. Thus, the (worst-case) running time of quicksort is‚.n
2
/.
7.4.2  Expected running time
We  have  already  seen  the  intuition  behind  why  the  expected  running  time  of
R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTisO.nlgn/:  if, in each level of recursion,  the split
induced by R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITIONputs any constant fraction of the elements
on one side of the partition, then the recursion tree has depth‚.lgn/,andO.n/
work is performed at each level. Even if we add a few new levels with the most un-
balanced split possible between these levels, the total time remainsO.nlgn/.We
can analyze  the expected  running  time of  R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTprecisely
by first understanding how the partitioning procedure operates and then using this
understanding  to derive anO.nlgn/bound on the expected running time.  This
upper bound on the expected running time, combined with the‚.nlgn/best-case
bound we saw in Section 7.2, yields a‚.nlgn/expected running time. We assume
throughout that the values of the elements being sorted are distinct.
Running time and comparisons
The Q
UICKSORTand RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTprocedures differ only in how
they select pivot elements; they are the same in all other respects. We can therefore
couch our analysis of R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTby discussing the QUICKSORT
and  PARTITIONprocedures,  but with the assumption  that pivot  elements are se-
lected randomly from the subarray passed to R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION.
The running time of Q
UICKSORTis dominated by the time spent in the PARTI-
TIONprocedure.  Each time the PARTITIONprocedure is called, it selects a pivot
element, and this element is never included in any future recursive calls to Q
UICK-
SORTand PARTITION.  Thus, there can be at mostncalls to PARTITIONover the
entire execution  of the quicksort  algorithm.   One call to  P
ARTITIONtakesO.1/
time plus an amount of time that is proportional to the number of iterations of the
forloop in lines 3–6.   Each iteration  of thisforloop performs  a comparison  in
line 4, comparing the pivot element to another element of the arrayA.  Therefore,

182Chapter 7Quicksort
if we can count the total number of times that line 4 is executed, we can bound the
total time spent in theforloop during the entire execution of Q
UICKSORT.
Lemma 7.1
LetXbe the number of comparisons performed in line 4 of P
ARTITIONover the
entire execution of Q
UICKSORTon ann-element array.  Then the running time of
Q
UICKSORTisO.nCX/.
ProofBy the discussion above, the algorithm makes at mostncalls to P
ARTI-
TION,  each of which does a constant  amount of work and then executes thefor
loop some number of times. Each iteration of theforloop executes line 4.
Our goal, therefore, is to computeX, the total number of comparisons performed
in all calls to P
ARTITION.  We will not attempt to analyze how many comparisons
are made ineachcall to P
ARTITION. Rather, we will derive an overall bound on the
total number of comparisons.  To do so, we must understand when the algorithm
compares two elements of the array and when it does not. For ease of analysis, we
rename the elements of the arrayAas ́
1
; ́
2
;:::; ́
n
, with ́
i
being theith smallest
element.  We also define the setZ
ij
D
f
 ́
i
; ́
iC1
;:::; ́
j
g
to be the set of elements
between ́
i
and ́
j
,inclusive.
When does the algorithm compare ́
i
and ́
j
?  To answer this question, we first
observe  that  each  pair  of  elements  is compared  at  most  once.   Why?   Elements
are compared only to the pivot element and, after a particular call of P
ARTITION
finishes, the pivot element used in that call is never again compared to any other
elements.
Our analysis uses indicator random variables (see Section 5.2). We define
X
ij
DI
f
 ́
i
is compared to ́
j
g
;
where we are considering whether the comparison takes place at any time during
the execution of the algorithm, not just during one iteration or one call of P
ARTI-
TION.  Since each pair is compared at most once, we can easily characterize the
total number of comparisons performed by the algorithm:
XD
n1
X
iD1
n
X
jDiC1
X
ij
:
Taking  expectations  of  both  sides,  and  then  using  linearity  of  expectation  and
Lemma 5.1, we obtain
EŒX DE
"
n1
X
iD1
n
X
jDiC1
X
ij
#

7.4Analysis of quicksort183
D
n1
X
iD1
n
X
jDiC1
EŒX
ij

D
n1
X
iD1
n
X
jDiC1
Pr
f
 ́
i
is compared to ́
j
g
:(7.2)
It  remains  to  compute  Pr
f
 ́
i
is compared to ́
j
g
.   Our  analysis  assumes  that  the
R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITIONprocedure chooses each pivot randomly and indepen-
dently.
Let  us  think  about  when  two  items  arenotcompared.   Consider  an  input  to
quicksort  of the numbers1through10(in any order),  and suppose  that the first
pivot element is7. Then the first call to P
ARTITIONseparates the numbers into two
sets:
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
and
f
8; 9; 10
g
.  In doing so, the pivot element7is compared
to all other elements, but no number from the first set (e.g., 2) is or ever will be
compared to any number from the second set (e.g., 9).
In general, because we assume that element values are distinct, once a pivotx
is chosen with ́
i
<x< ́
j
, we know that ́
i
and ́
j
cannot be compared at any
subsequent time. If, on the other hand, ́
i
is chosen as a pivot before any other item
inZ
ij
,then ́
i
will be compared to each item inZ
ij
, except for itself.  Similarly,
if ́
j
is chosen as a pivot before any other item inZ
ij
,then ́
j
will be compared to
each item inZ
ij
, except for itself. In our example, the values7and9are compared
because7is the first item fromZ
7;9
to be chosen as a pivot. In contrast,2and9will
never be compared because the first pivot element chosen fromZ
2;9
is7. Thus, ́
i
and ́
j
are compared if and only if the first element to be chosen as a pivot fromZ
ij
is either ́
i
or ́
j
.
We now  compute  the probability  that  this  event  occurs.   Prior  to  the point  at
which an element fromZ
ij
has been chosen as a pivot, the whole setZ
ij
is together
in the same partition. Therefore, any element ofZ
ij
is equally likely to be the first
one chosen as a pivot. Because the setZ
ij
hasjiC1elements, and because pivots
are chosen randomly and independently, the probability that any given element is
the first one chosen as a pivot is1=.jiC1/. Thus, we have
Pr
f
 ́
i
is compared to ́
j
g
DPr
f
 ́
i
or ́
j
is first pivot chosen fromZ
ij
g
DPr
f
 ́
i
is first pivot chosen fromZ
ij
g
CPr
f
 ́
j
is first pivot chosen fromZ
ij
g
D
1
jiC1
C
1
jiC1
D
2
jiC1
:(7.3)

184Chapter 7Quicksort
The second line follows because the two events are mutually exclusive. Combining
equations (7.2) and (7.3), we get that
EŒX D
n1
X
iD1
n
X
jDiC1
2
jiC1
:
We can evaluate this sum using a change of variables (kDji) and the bound
on the harmonic series in equation (A.7):
EŒX D
n1
X
iD1
n
X
jDiC1
2
jiC1
D
n1
X
iD1
ni
X
kD1
2
kC1
<
n1
X
iD1
n
X
kD1
2
k
D
n1
X
iD1
O.lgn/
DO.nlgn/ :(7.4)
Thus  we conclude  that,  using  R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION,  the  expected  running
time of quicksort isO.nlgn/when element values are distinct.
Exercises
7.4-1
Show that in the recurrence
T .n/Dmax
0qn1
.T .q/CT.nq1//C‚.n/ ;
T .n/D.n
2
/.
7.4-2
Show that quicksort’s best-case running time is.nlgn/.
7.4-3
Show  that  the  expressionq
2
C.nq1/
2
achieves  a  maximum  overqD
0; 1; : : : ; n1whenqD0orqDn1.
7.4-4
Show that R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT’s expected running time is.nlgn/.

Problems for Chapter 7185
7.4-5
We can improve the running time of quicksort in practice by taking advantage of the
fast running time of insertion sort when its input is “nearly” sorted.  Upon calling
quicksort  on a subarray with fewer thankelements,  let it simply return without
sorting the subarray. After the top-level call to quicksort returns, run insertion sort
on the entire array to finish the sorting process.  Argue that this sorting algorithm
runs inO.nkCnlg.n=k//expected time.  How should we pickk, both in theory
and in practice?
7.4-6?
Consider modifying the P
ARTITIONprocedure by randomly picking three elements
from arrayAand partitioning  about  their median (the middle value of the three
elements). Approximate the probability of getting at worst an ̨-to-.1 ̨/split, as
a function of ̨in the range0< ̨<1.
Problems
7-1  Hoare partition correctness
The  version  of  P
ARTITIONgiven  in  this  chapter  is  not  the  original  partitioning
algorithm. Here is the original partition algorithm, which is due to C. A. R. Hoare:
H
OARE-PARTITION.A;p;r/
1xDAŒp
2iDp1
3jDrC1
4while
TRUE
5repeat
6jDj1
7untilAŒj x
8repeat
9iDiC1
10untilAŒi x
11ifi<j
12exchangeAŒi withAŒj 
13else returnj
a.Demonstrate the operation of H
OARE-PARTITIONon the arrayADh13; 19; 9;
5; 12; 8; 7; 4; 11; 2; 6; 21i, showing the values of the array and auxiliary values
after each iteration of thewhileloop in lines 4–13.

186Chapter 7Quicksort
The  next  three  questions  ask  you  to give  a  careful  argument  that  the  procedure
H
OARE-PARTITIONis correct.  Assuming that the subarrayAŒp : : r contains at
least two elements, prove the following:
b.The indicesiandjare such that we never access an element ofAoutside the
subarrayAŒp : : r .
c.When H
OARE-PARTITIONterminates, it returns a valuejsuch thatpj<r.
d.Every element ofAŒp : : j is less than or equal to every element ofAŒjC1::r
when H
OARE-PARTITIONterminates.
The  P
ARTITIONprocedure  in  Section  7.1  separates  the  pivot  value  (originally
inAŒr ) from the two partitions it forms.  The H
OARE-PARTITIONprocedure, on
the other hand, always places the pivot value (originally inAŒp) into one of the
two partitionsAŒp : : j andAŒjC1::r.Sincepj<r, this split is always
nontrivial.
e.Rewrite the Q
UICKSORTprocedure to use HOARE-PARTITION.
7-2  Quicksort with equal element values
The analysis of the expected running time of randomized quicksort in Section 7.4.2
assumes  that all element values  are distinct.   In this problem,  we examine what
happens when they are not.
a.Suppose that all element values are equal.  What would be randomized quick-
sort’s running time in this case?
b.The  P
ARTITIONprocedure  returns  an  indexqsuch  that  each  element  of
AŒp : : q1is less than or equal toAŒqand each element ofAŒqC1::r
is greater thanAŒq. Modify the P
ARTITIONprocedure to produce a procedure
P
ARTITION
0
.A;p;r/, which permutes the elements ofAŒp : : r and returns two
indicesqandt,wherepqtr, such that

all elements ofAŒq : : t are equal,

each element ofAŒp : : q1is less thanAŒq,and

each element ofAŒtC1::ris greater thanAŒq.
Like P
ARTITION, your PARTITION
0
procedure should take‚.rp/time.
c.Modify  the  R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTprocedure  to  call  PARTITION
0
,and
name  the  new  procedure  R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT
0
.Then  modify  the
Q
UICKSORTprocedure  to produce  a procedure  QUICKSORT
0
.p; r /that calls

Problems for Chapter 7187
RANDOMIZED-PARTITION
0
and  recurses  only  on  partitions  of  elements  not
known to be equal to each other.
d.Using  Q
UICKSORT
0
,  how  would  you  adjust  the  analysis  in  Section  7.4.2  to
avoid the assumption that all elements are distinct?
7-3  Alternative quicksort analysis
An alternative  analysis  of  the running  time of  randomized  quicksort  focuses  on
the  expected  running  time  of  each  individual  recursive  call  to  R
ANDOMIZED-
Q
UICKSORT, rather than on the number of comparisons performed.
a.Argue that, given an array of sizen, the probability that any particular element
is chosen  as the pivot  is1=n.   Use this  to define indicator  random  variables
X
i
DI
f
ith smallest element is chosen as the pivot
g
.WhatisEŒX
i
?
b.LetT .n/be a random variable denoting the running time of quicksort  on an
array of sizen. Argue that
EŒT .n/DE
"
n
X
qD1
X
q
.T .q1/CT.nq/C‚.n//
#
:(7.5)
c.Show that we can rewrite equation (7.5) as
EŒT .n/D
2
n
n1
X
qD2
EŒT .q/C‚.n/ :(7.6)
d.Show that
n1
X
kD2
klgk
1
2
n
2
lgn
1
8
n
2
:(7.7)
(Hint:Split the summation into two parts, one forkD2;3;:::;
d
n=2
e
1and
one forkD
d
n=2
e
;:::;n1.)
e.Using the bound from equation (7.7), show that the recurrence in equation (7.6)
has  the  solution  EŒT .n/D‚.nlgn/.(Hint:Show,  by  substitution,  that
EŒT .n/anlgnfor sufficiently largenand for some positive constanta.)

188Chapter 7Quicksort
7-4  Stack depth for quicksort
The  Q
UICKSORTalgorithm  of Section  7.1 contains  two recursive  calls to itself.
After Q
UICKSORTcalls PARTITION, it recursively sorts the left subarray and then
it recursively sorts the right subarray.  The second recursive call in Q
UICKSORT
is  not  really  necessary;  we  can  avoid  it  by  using  an  iterative  control  structure.
This technique, calledtail recursion, is provided automatically by good compilers.
Consider the following version of quicksort, which simulates tail recursion:
T
AIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT.A;p;r/
1whilep<r
2//Partition and sort left subarray.
3qDP
ARTITION.A;p;r/
4T
AIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT.A;p;q1/
5pDqC1
a.Argue that T
AIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT.A;1;A:length/correctly sorts the
arrayA.
Compilers usually execute recursive procedures by using astackthat contains per-
tinent  information,  including  the parameter  values,  for  each  recursive  call.   The
information for the most recent call is at the top of the stack, and the information
for the initial call is at the bottom.  Upon calling a procedure,  its information is
pushedonto the stack;  when it terminates,  its information  ispopped.Sincewe
assume that array parameters are represented by pointers, the information for each
procedure call on the stack requiresO.1/stack space. Thestack depthis the max-
imum amount of stack space used at any time during a computation.
b.Describe a scenario in which T
AIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT’s stack depth is
‚.n/on ann-element input array.
c.Modify  the  code  for  T
AIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORTso  that  the  worst-case
stack depth is‚.lgn/.  Maintain theO.nlgn/expected  running  time of the
algorithm.
7-5  Median-of-3 partition
One  way  to  improve  the  R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTprocedure  is  to  partition
around  a pivot  that  is chosen  more carefully  than  by picking  a random  element
from  the  subarray.   One common  approach  is  themedian-of-3method:  choose
the pivot as the median (middle element) of a set of 3 elements randomly selected
from the subarray.  (See Exercise 7.4-6.)  For this problem, let us assume that the
elements in the input arrayAŒ1 : : nare distinct and thatn3.  We denote the

Problems for Chapter 7189
sorted  output  array  byA
0
Œ1::n.   Using  the  median-of-3  method  to  choose  the
pivot elementx,definep
i
DPr
f
xDA
0
Œi 
g
.
a.Give an exact formula forp
i
asafunctionofnandiforiD2;3;:::;n1.
(Note thatp
1
Dp
n
D0.)
b.By  what  amount  have  we  increased  the  likelihood  of  choosing  the  pivot  as
xDA
0
Œ
b
.nC1/=2
c
,  the  median  ofAŒ1 : : n,  compared  with  the  ordinary
implementation?   Assume thatn!1,  and give the  limiting  ratio  of these
probabilities.
c.If we define a “good” split to mean choosing  the pivot  asxDA
0
Œi ,where
n=3i2n=3, by what amount have we increased the likelihood of getting
a good split compared with the ordinary implementation?  (Hint:Approximate
the sum by an integral.)
d.Argue that in the.nlgn/running time of quicksort, the median-of-3 method
affects only the constant factor.
7-6  Fuzzy sorting of intervals
Consider  a sorting  problem  in which we do not  know  the numbers exactly.   In-
stead, for each number, we know an interval on the real line to which it belongs.
That is, we are givennclosed intervals of the formŒa
i
;b
i
,wherea
i
b
i
.We
wish tofuzzy-sortthese intervals, i.e., to produce a permutationhi
1
;i
2
;:::;i
n
iof
the intervals  such that forjD1;2;:::;n,  there  existc
j
2Œa
i
j
;b
i
j
satisfying
c
1
c
2
c
n
.
a.Design a randomized algorithm for fuzzy-sortingnintervals.  Your algorithm
should have the general structure of an algorithm that quicksorts the left end-
points (thea
i
values), but it should take advantage of overlapping intervals to
improve the running time.  (As the intervals overlap more and more, the prob-
lem of fuzzy-sorting the intervals becomes progressively easier. Your algorithm
should take advantage of such overlapping, to the extent that it exists.)
b.Argue that your algorithm runs in expected time‚.nlgn/in general, but runs
in expected time‚.n/when all of the intervals overlap (i.e., when there exists a
valuexsuch thatx2Œa
i
;b
i
for alli). Your algorithm should not be checking
for this case explicitly; rather, its performance should naturally improve as the
amount of overlap increases.

190Chapter 7Quicksort
Chapter notes
The quicksort procedure was invented by Hoare [170]; Hoare’s version appears in
Problem 7-1. The P
ARTITIONprocedure given in Section 7.1 is due to N. Lomuto.
The analysis  in Section 7.4 is due to Avrim Blum.   Sedgewick [305] and Bent-
ley [43] provide a good reference on the details of implementation and how they
matter.
McIlroy  [248]  showed  how  to  engineer  a  “killer  adversary”  that  produces  an
array on which virtually any implementation of quicksort takes‚.n
2
/time. If the
implementation is randomized,  the adversary produces the array after seeing the
random choices of the quicksort algorithm.

8Sorting in Linear Time
We have now introduced several algorithms that can sortnnumbers inO.nlgn/
time. Merge sort and heapsort achieve this upper bound in the worst case; quicksort
achieves it on average.  Moreover, for each of these algorithms, we can produce a
sequence ofninput numbers that causes the algorithm to run in.nlgn/time.
These algorithms share an interesting property:the sorted order they determine
is based only on comparisons  between the input  elements.  We call such sorting
algorithmscomparison sorts.  All the sorting algorithms  introduced  thus far are
comparison sorts.
In Section 8.1,  we shall  prove that any comparison  sort must make.nlgn/
comparisons in the worst case to sortnelements.  Thus, merge sort and heapsort
are asymptotically  optimal,  and no comparison  sort exists that is faster by more
than a constant factor.
Sections 8.2, 8.3, and 8.4 examine three sorting algorithms—counting sort, radix
sort,  and  bucket  sort—that  run  in  linear  time.   Of  course,  these  algorithms  use
operations  other than comparisons  to determine the sorted  order.   Consequently,
the.nlgn/lower bound does not apply to them.
8.1  Lower bounds for sorting
In a comparison  sort,  we use only comparisons  between elements  to gain order
information about an input sequenceha
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
i. That is, given two elements
a
i
anda
j
, we perform one of the testsa
i
<a
j
,a
i
a
j
,a
i
Da
j
,a
i
a
j
,or
a
i
>a
j
to determine their relative order.  We may not inspect the values of the
elements or gain order information about them in any other way.
In this section, we assume without loss of generality that all the input elements
are distinct.  Given this assumption, comparisons of the forma
i
Da
j
are useless,
so we can assume that no comparisons of this form are made.  We also note that
the comparisonsa
i
a
j
,a
i
a
j
,a
i
>a
j
,anda
i
<a
j
are all equivalent in that

192Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
≤>
≤>
1:2
2:31:3
〈1,2,3〉1:3〈2,1,3〉2:3
〈1,3,2〉〈3,1,2〉〈3,2,1〉
≤>
≤>
≤>
〈2,3,1〉
Figure 8.1The decision tree for insertion sort operating on three elements.  An internal node an-
notated  byi:jindicates  a  comparison  betweena
i
anda
j
.   A  leaf  annotated  by  the  permutation
h.1/; .2/; : : : ; .n/iindicates  the  orderinga
.1/
a
.2/
  a
.n/
.   The  shaded path
indicates  the  decisions  made  when  sorting  the  input  sequenceha
1
D6; a
2
D8; a
3
D5i;the
permutationh3; 1; 2iat the leaf indicates that the sorted ordering isa
3
D5a
1
D6a
2
D8.
There are3ŠD6possible permutations of the input elements, and so the decision tree must have at
least6leaves.
they yield identical information about the relative order ofa
i
anda
j
. We therefore
assume that all comparisons have the forma
i
a
j
.
The decision-tree model
We can view comparison  sorts abstractly  in terms of decision trees.  Adecision
treeis  a  full  binary  tree  that  represents  the  comparisons  between  elements  that
are performed by a particular sorting algorithm operating on an input of a given
size.  Control, data movement, and all other aspects of the algorithm are ignored.
Figure 8.1 shows the decision  tree corresponding  to the insertion  sort  algorithm
from Section 2.1 operating on an input sequence of three elements.
In a decision tree, we annotate each internal node byi:jfor someiandjin the
range1i; jn,wherenis the number of elements in the input sequence.  We
also annotate each leaf by a permutationh.1/; .2/; : : : ; .n/i. (See Section C.1
for background  on permutations.)   The execution of the sorting algorithm  corre-
sponds to tracing a simple path from the root of the decision tree down to a leaf.
Each internal node indicates a comparisona
i
a
j
.  The left subtree then dictates
subsequent comparisons once we know thata
i
a
j
, and the right subtree dictates
subsequent comparisons knowing thata
i
>a
j
. When we come to a leaf, the sort-
ing algorithm has established the orderinga
.1/
a
.2/
a
.n/
.  Because
any correct sorting algorithm must be able to produce each permutation of its input,
each of thenŠpermutations onnelements must appear as one of the leaves of the
decision tree for a comparison sort to be correct. Furthermore, each of these leaves
must be reachable from the root by a downward path corresponding  to an actual

8.1Lower bounds for sorting193
execution of the comparison sort.  (We shall refer to such leaves as “reachable.”)
Thus, we shall consider only decision trees in which each permutation appears as
a reachable leaf.
A lower bound for the worst case
The length of the longest  simple path from the root of a decision  tree to any of
its reachable leaves represents the worst-case number of comparisons that the cor-
responding sorting algorithm performs.  Consequently,  the worst-case number of
comparisons for a given comparison sort algorithm equals the height of its decision
tree. A lower bound on the heights of all decision trees in which each permutation
appears as a reachable leaf is therefore a lower bound on the running time of any
comparison sort algorithm. The following theorem establishes such a lower bound.
Theorem 8.1
Any comparison sort algorithm requires.nlgn/comparisons in the worst case.
ProofFrom  the  preceding  discussion,  it  suffices  to  determine  the  height  of  a
decision tree in which each permutation appears as a reachable leaf.  Consider a
decision tree of heighthwithlreachable  leaves corresponding  to a comparison
sort onnelements.  Because each of thenŠpermutations of the input appears as
some leaf, we havenŠl.  Since a binary tree of heighthhas no more than2
h
leaves, we have
nŠl2
h
;
which, by taking logarithms, implies
hlg.nŠ/(since the lg function is monotonically increasing)
D.nlgn/(by equation (3.19))  .
Corollary 8.2
Heapsort and merge sort are asymptotically optimal comparison sorts.
ProofTheO.nlgn/upper bounds on the running times for heapsort and merge
sort match the.nlgn/worst-case lower bound from Theorem 8.1.
Exercises
8.1-1
What is the smallest possible depth of a leaf in a decision tree for a comparison
sort?

194Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
8.1-2
Obtain  asymptotically  tight  bounds  on  lg.nŠ/without  using  Stirling’s  approxi-
mation.   Instead,  evaluate  the summation
P
n
kD1
lgkusing techniques  from Sec-
tion A.2.
8.1-3
Show that there is no comparison sort whose running time is linear for at least half
of thenŠinputs of lengthn. What about a fraction of1=nof the inputs of lengthn?
What about a fraction1=2
n
?
8.1-4
Suppose that you are given a sequence ofnelements to sort.  The input sequence
consists ofn=ksubsequences, each containingkelements. The elements in a given
subsequence are all smaller than the elements in the succeeding subsequence and
larger than the elements in the preceding subsequence.  Thus, all that is needed to
sort the whole sequence of lengthnis to sort thekelements in each of then=k
subsequences.   Show  an.nlgk/lower  bound  on  the  number  of  comparisons
needed  to solve  this  variant  of  the  sorting  problem.   (Hint:It is not  rigorous  to
simply combine the lower bounds for the individual subsequences.)
8.2  Counting sort
Counting sortassumes that each of theninput elements is an integer in the range
0tok, for some integerk.WhenkDO.n/, the sort runs in‚.n/time.
Counting sort determines, for each input elementx, the number of elements less
thanx.  It uses this information to place elementxdirectly into its position in the
output array. For example, if17elements are less thanx,thenxbelongs in output
position18. We must modify this scheme slightly to handle the situation in which
several elements have the same value, since we do not want to put them all in the
same position.
In the code for counting sort, we assume that the input is an arrayAŒ1 : : n,and
thusA:lengthDn.   We require  two other  arrays:  the  arrayBŒ1::nholds  the
sorted output, and the arrayCŒ0::kprovides temporary working storage.

8.2Counting sort195
25302303
12345678
202301
12345
A
C
(a)
224778C
(b)
3
12345678
224678
B
C
(c)
3
12345678
124678
B
C
(d)
0
3
12345678
124578
B
C
(e)
03
3
12345678
B
(f)
0302235
0
123450
123450123450
123450
Figure 8.2The operation of  COUNTING-SORTon an input arrayAŒ1::8,  where each element
ofAis a nonnegative integer no larger thankD5.(a)The arrayAand the auxiliary arrayCafter
line 5.(b)The arrayCafter line 8.(c)–(e)The output arrayBand the auxiliary arrayCafter one,
two, and three iterations of the loop in lines 10–12, respectively. Only the lightly shaded elements of
arrayBhave been filled in.(f)The final sorted output arrayB.
COUNTING-SORT.A;B;k/
1letCŒ0::kbeanewarray
2foriD0tok
3CŒiD0
4forjD1toA:length
5C ŒAŒj DC ŒAŒj C1
6//CŒinow contains the number of elements equal toi.
7foriD1tok
8CŒiDCŒiCCŒi1
9//CŒinow contains the number of elements less than or equal toi.
10forjDA:lengthdownto1
11BŒC ŒAŒj DAŒj 
12C ŒAŒj DC ŒAŒj 1
Figure 8.2 illustrates counting sort.  After theforloop of lines 2–3 initializes the
arrayCto all zeros, theforloop of lines 4–5 inspects each input element.  If the
value of an input element isi, we incrementCŒi.  Thus, after line 5,CŒiholds
the number of input elements equal toifor each integeriD0; 1; : : : ; k. Lines 7–8
determine for eachiD
0; 1; : : : ; khow many input elements are less than or equal
toiby keeping a running sum of the arrayC.

196Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
Finally,  theforloop of  lines 10–12  places  each elementAŒj into its correct
sorted position in the output arrayB.Ifallnelements are distinct, then when we
first enter  line 10,  for  eachAŒj ,thevalueC ŒAŒj is the correct  final position
ofAŒj in the output  array,  since there areC ŒAŒj elements less than or equal
toAŒj .  Because the elements might not be distinct, we decrementC ŒAŒj each
time we place a valueAŒj into theBarray.  DecrementingC ŒAŒj causes the
next input element with a value equal toAŒj , if one exists, to go to the position
immediately beforeAŒj in the output array.
How much time does  counting  sort  require?   Theforloop  of lines  2–3 takes
time‚.k/,theforloop of lines 4–5 takes time‚.n/,theforloop of lines 7–8 takes
time‚.k/,andtheforloop of lines 10–12 takes time‚.n/. Thus, the overall time
is‚.kCn/. In practice, we usually use counting sort when we havekDO.n/,in
which case the running time is‚.n/.
Counting sort beats the lower bound of.nlgn/proved in Section 8.1 because
it is not a comparison sort.  In fact, no comparisons between input elements occur
anywhere in the code. Instead, counting sort uses the actual values of the elements
to index into an array. The.nlgn/lower bound for sorting does not apply when
we depart from the comparison sort model.
An important property of counting sort is that it isstable: numbers with the same
value appear in the output array in the same order as they do in the input array. That
is, it breaks ties between two numbers by the rule that whichever number appears
first in the input array appears first in the output array.  Normally, the property of
stability is important only when satellite data are carried around with the element
being sorted.  Counting sort’s stability is important for another  reason:  counting
sort is often used as a subroutine in radix sort. As we shall see in the next section,
in order for radix sort to work correctly, counting sort must be stable.
Exercises
8.2-1
Using Figure 8.2 as a model, illustrate the operation of C
OUNTING-SORTon the
arrayADh6; 0; 2; 0; 1; 3; 4; 6; 1; 3; 2i.
8.2-2
Prove that C
OUNTING-SORTis stable.
8.2-3
Suppose that we were to rewrite theforloop header in line 10 of the C
OUNTING-
S
ORTas
10forjD1toA:length
Show that the algorithm still works properly. Is the modified algorithm stable?

8.3Radix sort197
8.2-4
Describe an algorithm that, givennintegers in the range0tok, preprocesses its
input  and  then  answers  any query  about  how  many of  thenintegers  fall into  a
rangeŒa::binO.1/time.  Your algorithm should use‚.nCk/preprocessing
time.
8.3  Radix sort
Radix sortis the algorithm used by the card-sorting machines you now find only in
computer museums. The cards have 80 columns, and in each column a machine can
punch a hole in one of 12 places.  The sorter can be mechanically “programmed”
to examine a given column of each card in a deck and distribute the card into one
of  12  bins  depending  on which  place  has  been  punched.   An operator  can  then
gather the cards bin by bin, so that cards with the first place punched are on top of
cards with the second place punched, and so on.
For  decimal  digits,  each  column  uses  only  10  places.   (The  other  two places
are reserved for encoding nonnumeric characters.)  Ad-digit number would then
occupy a field ofdcolumns.  Since the card sorter can look at only one column
at a time, the problem of sortingncards on ad-digit number requires a sorting
algorithm.
Intuitively, you might sort numbers on theirmost significantdigit, sort each of
the resulting bins recursively, and then combine the decks in order. Unfortunately,
since the cards in9of the10bins must be put aside to sort each of the bins, this
procedure generates many intermediate piles of cards that you would have to keep
track of. (See Exercise 8.3-5.)
Radix sort solves the problem of card sorting—counterintuitively—by sorting on
theleast significantdigit first. The algorithm then combines the cards into a single
deck,  with the cards in the0bin preceding  the cards in the1bin preceding  the
cards in the2bin, and so on. Then it sorts the entire deck again on the second-least
significant digit and recombines the deck in a like manner.  The process continues
until the cards have been sorted on allddigits. Remarkably, at that point the cards
are fully sorted on thed-digit number.  Thus, onlydpasses through the deck are
required to sort.  Figure 8.3 shows how radix sort operates on a “deck” of seven
3-digit numbers.
In order for radix sort to work correctly, the digit sorts must be stable.  The sort
performed  by  a card  sorter  is  stable,  but  the  operator  has  to  be  wary  about  not
changing the order of the cards as they come out of a bin, even though all the cards
in a bin have the same digit in the chosen column.

198Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
329
457
657
839
436
720
355
329
457
657
839
436
720
355329
457
657
839
436
720
355
329
457
657
839
436
720
355
Figure 8.3The operation of radix sort on a list of seven3-digit numbers.  The leftmost column is
the input. The remaining columns show the list after successive sorts on increasingly significant digit
positions. Shading indicates the digit position sorted on to produce each list from the previous one.
In a typical computer, which is a sequential random-access machine, we some-
times use radix sort to sort records of information that are keyed by multiple fields.
For example, we might wish to sort dates by three keys: year, month, and day. We
could run a sorting  algorithm  with a comparison  function  that,  given two dates,
compares years, and if there is a tie, compares months, and if another tie occurs,
compares  days.   Alternatively,  we could  sort  the information  three  times with a
stable sort: first on day, next on month, and finally on year.
The code for radix sort is straightforward. The following procedure assumes that
each element in then-element arrayAhasddigits, where digit1is the lowest-order
digit and digitdis the highest-order digit.
R
ADIX-SORT.A; d /
1foriD1tod
2use a stable sort to sort arrayAon digiti
Lemma 8.3
Givennd-digit numbers in which each digit can take on up tokpossible values,
R
ADIX-SORTcorrectly sorts these numbers in‚.d.nCk//time if the stable sort
it uses takes‚.nCk/time.
ProofThe correctness  of radix sort  follows by induction  on the column being
sorted (see Exercise 8.3-3). The analysis of the running time depends on the stable
sort used as the intermediate sorting algorithm.  When each digit is in the range0
tok1(so that it can take onkpossible values), andkis not too large, counting sort
is the obvious choice. Each pass overnd-digit numbers then takes time‚.nCk/.
There aredpasses, and so the total time for radix sort is‚.d.nCk//.
Whendis constant andkDO.n/, we can make radix sort run in linear time.
More generally, we have some flexibility in how to break each key into digits.

8.3Radix sort199
Lemma 8.4
Givennb-bit numbers and any positive integerrb,R
ADIX-SORTcorrectly sorts
these numbers in‚..b=r /.nC2
r
//time if the stable sort it uses takes‚.nCk/
time for inputs in the range0tok.
ProofFor a valuerb, we view each key as havingdD
d
b=r
e
digits ofrbits
each. Each digit is an integer in the range 0 to2
r
1, so that we can use counting
sort withkD2
r
1. (For example, we can view a 32-bit word as having four 8-bit
digits, so thatbD32,rD8,kD2
r
1D255,anddDb=rD4.) Each pass of
counting sort takes time‚.nCk/D‚.nC2
r
/and there aredpasses, for a total
running time of‚.d.nC2
r
//D‚..b=r /.nC2
r
//.
For given values  ofnandb,  we wish to choose  the value ofr,  withrb,
that minimizes the expression.b=r /.nC2
r
/.Ifb<
b
lgn
c
, then for any value
ofrb,wehavethat.nC2
r
/D‚.n/.  Thus, choosingrDbyields a running
time of.b=b/.nC2
b
/D‚.n/, which is asymptotically optimal.  Ifb
b
lgn
c
,
then choosingrD
b
lgn
c
gives the best time to within a constant  factor,  which
we can see as follows. ChoosingrD
b
lgn
c
yields a running time of‚.b n=lgn/.
As we increaserabove
b
lgn
c
,the2
r
term in the numerator increases faster than
therterm in the denominator, and so increasingrabove
b
lgn
c
yields a running
time of.b n=lgn/.  If instead we were to decreaserbelow
b
lgn
c
, then theb=r
term increases and thenC2
r
term remains at‚.n/.
Is radix sort preferable to a comparison-based sorting algorithm, such as quick-
sort? IfbDO.lgn/, as is often the case, and we chooserlgn, then radix sort’s
running time is‚.n/, which appears to be better than quicksort’s expected running
time of‚.nlgn/.  The constant factors hidden in the‚-notation differ, however.
Although radix sort may make fewer passes than quicksort over thenkeys, each
pass of radix sort may take significantly longer. Which sorting algorithm we prefer
depends on the characteristics of the implementations, of the underlying machine
(e.g., quicksort often uses hardware caches more effectively than radix sort), and
of the input data. Moreover, the version of radix sort that uses counting sort as the
intermediate stable sort does not sort in place, which many of the‚.nlgn/-time
comparison sorts do.  Thus,  when primary memory storage is at a premium,  we
might prefer an in-place algorithm such as quicksort.
Exercises
8.3-1
Using Figure 8.3 as a model, illustrate the operation of R
ADIX-SORTon the fol-
lowing list of English words:  COW, DOG, SEA, RUG, ROW, MOB, BOX, TAB,
BAR, EAR, TAR, DIG, BIG, TEA, NOW, FOX.

200Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
8.3-2
Which of the following sorting algorithms are stable:  insertion sort,  merge sort,
heapsort, and quicksort?  Give a simple scheme that makes any sorting algorithm
stable. How much additional time and space does your scheme entail?
8.3-3
Use  induction  to  prove  that  radix  sort  works.   Where  does  your  proof  need  the
assumption that the intermediate sort is stable?
8.3-4
Show how to sortnintegers in the range0ton
3
1inO.n/time.
8.3-5?
In the first card-sorting algorithm in this section, exactly how many sorting passes
are needed to sortd-digit decimal numbers in the worst case?  How many piles of
cards would an operator need to keep track of in the worst case?
8.4  Bucket sort
Bucket sortassumes that the input is drawn from a uniform distribution and has an
average-case running time ofO.n/. Like counting sort, bucket sort is fast because
it assumes something about the input. Whereas counting sort assumes that the input
consists of integers in a small range, bucket sort assumes that the input is generated
by a random process that distributes elements uniformly and independently  over
the intervalŒ0; 1/. (See Section C.2 for a definition of uniform distribution.)
Bucket sort divides the intervalŒ0; 1/intonequal-sized subintervals, orbuckets,
and then distributes theninput numbers into the buckets. Since the inputs are uni-
formly and independently distributed overŒ0; 1/, we do not expect many numbers
to fall into each bucket. To produce the output, we simply sort the numbers in each
bucket and then go through the buckets in order, listing the elements in each.
Our  code  for  bucket  sort  assumes  that  the input  is ann-element  arrayAand
that each elementAŒi in the array satisfies0AŒi  < 1.  The code requires an
auxiliary arrayBŒ0::n1of linked lists (buckets) and assumes that there is a
mechanism for maintaining such lists.  (Section 10.2 describes how to implement
basic operations on linked lists.)

8.4Bucket sort201
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
.78
.17
.39
.72
.94
.21
.12
.23
.68
A
(a)
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
B
(b)
0
.12.17
.21.23
.26
.26
.39
.68
.72.78
.94
Figure 8.4The operation of BUCKET-SORTfornD10.(a)The input arrayAŒ1 : : 10.(b)The
arrayBŒ0 : :9of sorted lists (buckets) after line 8 of the algorithm.  Bucketiholds values in the
half-open intervalŒi=10; .iC1/=10/.  The sorted output consists of a concatenation in order of the
listsBŒ0; BŒ1; : : : ; BŒ9.
BUCKET-SORT.A/
1letBŒ0::n1beanewarray
2nDA:length
3foriD0ton1
4makeBŒian empty list
5foriD1ton
6insertAŒi into listBŒ
b
nAŒi 
c

7foriD0ton1
8sort listBŒiwith insertion sort
9    concatenate the listsBŒ0; BŒ1; : : : ; BŒn1together in order
Figure 8.4 shows the operation of bucket sort on an input array of10numbers.
To see that this algorithm works, consider two elementsAŒi andAŒj . Assume
without  loss  of  generality  thatAŒi AŒj .Since
b
nAŒi 
c

b
nAŒj 
c
,  either
elementAŒi goes into the same bucket asAŒj or it goes into a bucket with a lower
index. IfAŒi andAŒj go into the same bucket, then theforloop of lines 7–8 puts
them into the proper order.  IfAŒi andAŒj go into different buckets, then line 9
puts them into the proper order. Therefore, bucket sort works correctly.
To analyze the running time, observe that all lines except line 8 takeO.n/time
in the worst case. We need to analyze the total time taken by thencalls to insertion
sort in line 8.

202Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
To analyze the cost of the calls to insertion sort, letn
i
be the random variable
denoting the number of elements placed in bucketBŒi.  Since insertion sort runs
in quadratic time (see Section 2.2), the running time of bucket sort is
T .n/D‚.n/C
n1
X
iD0
O.n
2
i
/:
We now analyze the average-case running time of bucket sort, by computing the
expected value of the running time, where we take the expectation over the input
distribution.  Taking expectations of both sides and using linearity of expectation,
we have
EŒT .n/DE
"
‚.n/C
n1
X
iD0
O.n
2
i
/
#
D‚.n/C
n1
X
iD0
E

O.n
2
i
/

(by linearity of expectation)
D‚.n/C
n1
X
iD0
O

E

n
2
i

(by equation (C.22))  .(8.1)
We claim that
E

n
2
i

D21=n(8.2)
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  It is no surprise that each bucketihas the same value of
EŒn
2
i
, since each value in the input arrayAis equally likely to fall in any bucket.
To prove equation (8.2), we define indicator random variables
X
ij
DI
f
AŒj falls in bucketi
g
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n1andjD1;2;:::;n. Thus,
n
i
D
n
X
jD1
X
ij
:
To compute EŒn
2
i
, we expand the square and regroup terms:

8.4Bucket sort203
E

n
2
i

DE
" 
n
X
jD1
X
ij
!
2
#
DE
"
n
X
jD1
n
X
kD1
X
ij
X
ik
#
DE
2
4
n
X
jD1
X
2
ij
C
X
1jn
X
1kn
k¤j
X
ij
X
ik
3
5
D
n
X
jD1
E

X
2
ij

C
X
1jn
X
1kn
k¤j
EŒX
ij
X
ik
;(8.3)
where the last line follows by linearity of expectation.  We evaluate the two sum-
mations separately.  Indicator random variableX
ij
is1with probability1=nand0
otherwise, and therefore
E

X
2
ij

D1
2

1
n
C0
2


1
1
n

D
1
n
:
Whenk¤j, the variablesX
ij
andX
ik
are independent, and hence
EŒX
ij
X
ik
DEŒX
ij
EŒX
ik

D
1
n

1
n
D
1
n
2
:
Substituting these two expected values in equation (8.3), we obtain
E

n
2
i

D
n
X
jD1
1
n
C
X
1jn
X
1kn
k¤j
1
n
2
Dn
1
n
Cn.n1/
1
n
2
D1C
n1
n
D2
1
n
;
which proves equation (8.2).

204Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
Using this expected value in equation (8.1), we conclude that the average-case
running time for bucket sort is‚.n/CnO.21=n/D‚.n/.
Even if the input is not drawn from a uniform distribution, bucket sort may still
run in linear time. As long as the input has the property that the sum of the squares
of the bucket sizes is linear in the total number of elements, equation (8.1) tells us
that bucket sort will run in linear time.
Exercises
8.4-1
Using Figure 8.4 as a model, illustrate the operation of B
UCKET-SORTon the array
ADh:79; :13; :16; :64; :39; :20; :89; :53; :71; :42i.
8.4-2
Explain why the worst-case running time for bucket sort is‚.n
2
/.  What simple
change to the algorithm preserves its linear average-case running time and makes
its worst-case running timeO.nlgn/?
8.4-3
LetXbe a random variable that is equal to the number of heads in two flips of a
fair coin. What is EŒX
2
?WhatisE
2
ŒX ?
8.4-4?
We are givennpoints in the unit circle,p
i
D.x
i
;y
i
/, such that0<x
2
i
Cy
2
i
1
foriD1;2;:::;n.  Suppose that the points are uniformly distributed; that is, the
probability of finding a point in any region of the circle is proportional to the area
of that region.  Design an algorithm with an average-case running time of‚.n/to
sort thenpoints by their distancesd
i
D
p
x
2
i
Cy
2
i
from the origin. (Hint:Design
the bucket sizes in B
UCKET-SORTto reflect the uniform distribution of the points
in the unit circle.)
8.4-5?
Aprobability distribution functionP.x/for  a  random  variableXis  defined
byP.x/DPr
f
Xx
g
.   Suppose  that  we  draw  a  list  ofnrandom  variables
X
1
;X
2
;:::;X
n
from a continuous probability distribution functionPthat is com-
putable inO.1/time. Give an algorithm that sorts these numbers in linear average-
case time.

Problems for Chapter 8205
Problems
8-1  Probabilistic lower bounds on comparison sorting
In this problem, we prove a probabilistic.nlgn/lower bound on the running time
of any deterministic or randomized comparison sort onndistinct input elements.
We begin by examining a deterministic comparison sortAwith decision treeT
A
.
We assume that every permutation ofA’s inputs is equally likely.
a.Suppose that each leaf ofT
A
is labeled with the probability that it is reached
given a random input. Prove that exactlynŠleaves are labeled1=nŠand that the
rest are labeled0.
b.LetD.T /denote the external path length of a decision treeT;thatis,D.T /
is the sum of the depths of all the leaves ofT.LetTbe a decision tree with
k>1leaves, and letLTandRTbe the left and right subtrees ofT. Show that
D.T /DD.LT/CD.RT/Ck.
c.Letd.k/be the minimum value ofD.T /over all decision treesTwithk>1
leaves. Show thatd.k/Dmin
1ik1
f
d.i/Cd.ki/Ck
g
.(Hint:Consider
a decision treeTwithkleaves that achieves the minimum. Leti
0
be the number
of leaves inLTandki
0
the number of leaves inRT.)
d.Prove that for a given value ofk>1andiin the range1ik1,the
functionilgiC.ki/lg.ki/is minimized atiDk=2.   Conclude that
d.k/D.klgk/.
e.Prove thatD.T
A
/D.nŠlg.nŠ//, and conclude that the average-case time to
sortnelements is.nlgn/.
Now,  consider  arandomizedcomparison  sortB.   We  can  extend  the  decision-
tree model to handle randomization by incorporating two kinds of nodes: ordinary
comparison  nodes and “randomization”  nodes.   A randomization  node models a
random choice of the form R
ANDOM.1; r /made by algorithmB; the node hasr
children, each of which is equally likely to be chosen during an execution of the
algorithm.
f.Show that for any randomized comparison sortB, there exists a deterministic
comparison  sortAwhose  expected  number  of  comparisons  is  no  more  than
those made byB.

206Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
8-2  Sorting in place in linear time
Suppose that we have an array ofndata records to sort and that the key of each
record has the value0or1.  An algorithm for sorting such a set of records might
possess some subset of the following three desirable characteristics:
1.   The algorithm runs inO.n/time.
2.   The algorithm is stable.
3.   The algorithm sorts in place, using no more than a constant amount of storage
space in addition to the original array.
a.Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 1 and 2 above.
b.Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 1 and 3 above.
c.Give an algorithm that satisfies criteria 2 and 3 above.
d.Can you use any of your sorting algorithms from parts (a)–(c) as the sorting
method used in line 2 of R
ADIX-SORT,sothatRADIX-SORTsortsnrecords
withb-bit keys inO.bn/time? Explain how or why not.
e.Suppose that thenrecords have keys in the range from1tok.Showhowto
modify counting sort so that it sorts the records in place inO.nCk/time. You
may useO.k/storage outside the input array. Is your algorithm stable? (Hint:
How would you do it forkD3?)
8-3  Sorting variable-length items
a.You are given an array of integers, where different integers may have different
numbers of digits, but the total number of digits overallthe integers in the array
isn. Show how to sort the array inO.n/time.
b.You are given an array of strings,  where different strings  may have different
numbers of characters,  but the total number of characters over all the strings
isn. Show how to sort the strings inO.n/time.
(Note that the desired order here is the standard alphabetical order; for example,
a<ab<b.)
8-4  Water jugs
Suppose that you are givennred andnblue water jugs, all of different shapes and
sizes. All red jugs hold different amounts of water, as do the blue ones. Moreover,
for every red jug, there is a blue jug that holds the same amount of water, and vice
versa.

Problems for Chapter 8207
Your task is to find a grouping of the jugs into pairs of red and blue jugs that hold
the same amount of water. To do so, you may perform the following operation: pick
a pair of jugs in which one is red and one is blue, fill the red jug with water, and
then pour the water into the blue jug.  This operation will tell you whether the red
or the blue jug can hold more water, or that they have the same volume.  Assume
that such a comparison takes one time unit.  Your goal is to find an algorithm that
makes a minimum number of comparisons to determine the grouping.  Remember
that you may not directly compare two red jugs or two blue jugs.
a.Describe a deterministic algorithm that uses‚.n
2
/comparisons to group the
jugs into pairs.
b.Prove a lower bound of.nlgn/for the number of comparisons that an algo-
rithm solving this problem must make.
c.Give  a  randomized  algorithm  whose  expected  number  of  comparisons  is
O.nlgn/, and prove that this bound is correct.  What is the worst-case num-
ber of comparisons for your algorithm?
8-5  Average sorting
Suppose that, instead of sorting an array, we just require that the elements increase
on  average.   More  precisely,  we  call  ann-element  arrayAk-sortedif,  for  all
iD1;2;:::;nk, the following holds:
P
iCk1
jDi
AŒj 
k

P
iCk
jDiC1
AŒj 
k
:
a.What does it mean for an array to be 1-sorted?
b.Give a permutation of the numbers1;2;:::;10that is 2-sorted, but not sorted.
c.Prove that ann-element array isk-sorted if and only ifAŒi AŒiCkfor all
iD1;2;:::;nk.
d.Give an algorithm thatk-sorts ann-element array inO.nlg.n=k//time.
We can also show a lower bound on the time to produce ak-sorted array, whenk
is a constant.
e.Show that we can sort ak-sorted array of lengthninO.nlgk/time.  (Hint:
Use the solution to Exercise 6.5-9. )
f.Show that whenkis a constant,k-sorting ann-element array requires.nlgn/
time.  (Hint:Use the solution to the previous part along with the lower bound
on comparison sorts.)

208Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
8-6  Lower bound on merging sorted lists
The problem of merging two sorted lists arises frequently.  We have seen a pro-
cedure for it as the subroutine M
ERGEin Section 2.3.1.  In this problem, we will
prove a lower bound of2n1on the worst-case number of comparisons required
to merge two sorted lists, each containingnitems.
First we will show a lower bound of2no.n/comparisons by using a decision
tree.
a.Given2nnumbers, compute the number of possible ways to divide them into
two sorted lists, each withnnumbers.
b.Using a decision tree and your answer to part (a), show that any algorithm that
correctly merges two sorted lists must perform at least2no.n/comparisons.
Now we will show a slightly tighter2n1bound.
c.Show that if two elements are consecutive in the sorted order and from different
lists, then they must be compared.
d.Use your answer to the previous part to show a lower bound of2n1compar-
isons for merging two sorted lists.
8-7  The 0-1 sorting lemma and columnsort
Acompare-exchangeoperation on two array elementsAŒi andAŒj ,wherei<j,
has the form
C
OMPARE-EXCHANGE.A;i;j/
1ifAŒi  > AŒj 
2exchangeAŒi withAŒj 
After the compare-exchange operation, we know thatAŒi AŒj .
Anoblivious compare-exchange algorithmoperates  solely  by  a  sequence  of
prespecified compare-exchange operations. The indices of the positions compared
in  the  sequence  must  be  determined  in  advance,  and  although  they  can  depend
on the number of elements being sorted, they cannot depend on the values being
sorted, nor can they depend on the result of any prior compare-exchange operation.
For example,  here is insertion  sort  expressed  as an oblivious  compare-exchange
algorithm:
I
NSERTION-SORT.A/
1forjD2toA:length
2foriDj1downto1
3C
OMPARE-EXCHANGE.A;i;iC1/

Problems for Chapter 8209
The0-1 sorting lemmaprovides  a  powerful  way  to  prove  that  an  oblivious
compare-exchange  algorithm produces a sorted result.  It states that if an oblivi-
ous compare-exchange algorithm correctly sorts all input sequences consisting of
only 0s and 1s, then it correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.
You will prove the 0-1 sorting lemma by proving its contrapositive: if an oblivi-
ous compare-exchange algorithm fails to sort an input containing arbitrary values,
then it fails to sort some 0-1 input. Assume that an oblivious compare-exchange al-
gorithm X fails to correctly sort the arrayAŒ1 : : n.LetAŒpbe the smallest value
inAthat algorithm X puts into the wrong location, and letAŒqbe the value that
algorithm X moves to the location into whichAŒpshould have gone.  Define an
arrayBŒ1::nof 0s and 1s as follows:
BŒiD
(
0ifAŒi AŒp ;
1ifAŒi  > AŒp :
a.Argue thatAŒq > AŒp,sothatBŒpD0andBŒqD1.
b.To complete the proof of the 0-1 sorting lemma, prove that algorithm X fails to
sort arrayBcorrectly.
Now you will use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that a particular sorting algo-
rithm works correctly.  The algorithm,columnsort, works on a rectangular  array
ofnelements.  The array hasrrows andscolumns (so thatnDrs), subject to
three restrictions:

rmust be even,

smust be a divisor ofr,and

r2s
2
.
When columnsort completes, the array is sorted incolumn-major order:  reading
down the columns, from left to right, the elements monotonically increase.
Columnsort operates in eight steps, regardless of the value ofn.  The odd steps
are all the same: sort each column individually. Each even step is a fixed permuta-
tion. Here are the steps:
1.  Sort each column.
2.  Transpose  the  array,  but  reshape  it  back  torrows andscolumns.   In  other
words, turn the leftmost column into the topr=srows, in order; turn the next
column into the nextr=srows, in order; and so on.
3.  Sort each column.
4.  Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 2.

210Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
10145
8717
1216
16911
4152
18313
(a)
412
835
1076
12911
161413
181517
(b)
4810
12    1618
137
91415
256
11    1317
(c)
136
257
4810
91315
111417
121618
(d)
1411
3814
61017
2912
51316
71518
(e)
1411
2812
3914
51016
61317
71518
(f)
51016
61317
71518
1411
2812
3914
(g)
41016
51117
61218
1713
2814
3915
(h)
1713
2814
3915
41016
51117
61218
(i)
Figure 8.5The steps of columnsort.(a)The input array with 6 rows and 3 columns.(b)After
sorting each column in step 1.(c)After transposing and reshaping in step 2.(d)After sorting each
columninstep3.(e)After performing step 4, which inverts the permutation from step 2.(f)After
sorting each column in step 5.(g)After shifting by half a column in step 6.(h)After sorting each
column in step 7.(i)After performing step 8, which inverts the permutation from step 6.  The array
is now sorted in column-major order.
5.   Sort each column.
6.   Shift the top half of each column into the bottom half of the same column, and
shift the bottom half of each column into the top half of the next column to the
right.  Leave the top half of the leftmost column empty.  Shift the bottom half
of the last column into the top half of a new rightmost column, and leave the
bottom half of this new column empty.
7.   Sort each column.
8.   Perform the inverse of the permutation performed in step 6.
Figure 8.5 shows an example of the steps of columnsort withrD6andsD3.
(Even though this example violates the requirement  thatr2s
2
, it happens to
work.)
c.Argue that  we can treat  columnsort  as an oblivious  compare-exchange  algo-
rithm, even if we do not know what sorting method the odd steps use.
Although it might seem hard to believe that columnsort actually sorts, you will
use the 0-1 sorting lemma to prove that it does.  The 0-1 sorting lemma applies
because we can treat columnsort as an oblivious compare-exchange algorithm.  A

Notes for Chapter 8211
couple of definitions will help you apply the 0-1 sorting lemma. We say that an area
of an array iscleanif we know that it contains either all 0s or all 1s.  Otherwise,
the area might contain mixed 0s and 1s, and it isdirty.  From here on, assume that
the input array contains only 0s and 1s, and that we can treat it as an array withr
rows andscolumns.
d.Prove that after steps 1–3, the array consists of some clean rows of 0s at the top,
some clean rows of 1s at the bottom, and at mostsdirty rows between them.
e.Prove that after step 4, the array, read in column-major order, starts with a clean
area  of  0s,  ends  with  a  clean  area  of  1s,  and  has  a  dirty  area  of  at  mosts
2
elements in the middle.
f.Prove that steps 5–8 produce a fully sorted 0-1 output.  Conclude that column-
sort correctly sorts all inputs containing arbitrary values.
g.Now suppose  thatsdoes  not  divider.   Prove that  after  steps  1–3,  the array
consists  of  some  clean  rows  of  0s  at  the  top,  some  clean  rows  of  1s  at  the
bottom,  and at most2s1dirty rows between them.  How large mustrbe,
compared withs, for columnsort to correctly sort whensdoes not divider?
h.Suggest a simple change to step 1 that allows us to maintain the requirement
thatr2s
2
even whensdoes not divider, and prove that with your change,
columnsort correctly sorts.
Chapter notes
The  decision-tree  model  for  studying  comparison  sorts  was  introduced  by  Ford
and Johnson [110].  Knuth’s comprehensive treatise on sorting [211] covers many
variations on the sorting problem, including the information-theoretic lower bound
on the complexity  of sorting  given here.   Ben-Or [39] studied  lower bounds  for
sorting using generalizations of the decision-tree model.
Knuth credits H. H. Seward with inventing counting sort in 1954, as well as with
the idea of combining counting sort with radix sort. Radix sorting starting with the
least significant digit appears to be a folk algorithm widely used by operators of
mechanical card-sorting machines.  According to Knuth, the first published refer-
ence to the method is a 1929 document by L. J. Comrie describing punched-card
equipment.  Bucket sorting has been in use since 1956, when the basic idea was
proposed by E. J. Isaac and R. C. Singleton [188].
Munro and Raman [263] give a stable sorting algorithm that performsO.n
1C
/
comparisons in the worst case, where0<1is any fixed constant.  Although

212Chapter 8Sorting in Linear Time
any of theO.nlgn/-time algorithms make fewer comparisons,  the algorithm by
Munro and Raman moves data onlyO.n/times and operates in place.
The case of  sortingnb-bit integers  ino.nlgn/time has  been considered  by
many researchers.  Several positive results have been obtained, each under slightly
different assumptions about the model of computation and the restrictions placed
on the algorithm. All the results assume that the computer memory is divided into
addressableb-bit words. Fredman and Willard [115] introduced the fusion tree data
structure and used it to sortnintegers inO.nlgn=lg lgn/time.  This bound was
later improved toO.n
p
lgn/time by Andersson [16].  These algorithms require
the use of multiplication and several precomputed constants. Andersson, Hagerup,
Nilsson, and Raman [17] have shown how to sortnintegers inO.nlg lgn/time
without  using  multiplication,  but  their  method  requires  storage  that  can  be  un-
bounded in terms ofn.  Using multiplicative hashing,  we can reduce the storage
needed toO.n/, but then theO.nlg lgn/worst-case bound on the running time
becomes  an  expected-time  bound.   Generalizing  the  exponential  search  trees  of
Andersson [16], Thorup [335] gave anO.n.lg lgn/
2
/-time sorting algorithm that
does not use multiplication or randomization, and it uses linear space.  Combining
these techniques with some new ideas, Han [158] improved the bound for sorting
toO.nlg lgnlg lg lgn/time.  Although these algorithms are important theoretical
breakthroughs, they are all fairly complicated and at the present time seem unlikely
to compete with existing sorting algorithms in practice.
The columnsort algorithm in Problem 8-7 is by Leighton [227].

9Medians and Order Statistics
Theithorder statisticof  a  set  ofnelements  is  theith  smallest  element.   For
example,  theminimumof  a  set  of  elements  is  the  first order  statistic  (iD1),
and  themaximumis  thenth order  statistic  (iDn).   Amedian,  informally,  is
the “halfway point” of the set.  Whennis odd, the median is unique, occurring at
iD.nC1/=2.Whennis even, there are two medians, occurring atiDn=2and
iDn=2C1. Thus, regardless of the parity ofn, medians occur atiD
b
.nC1/=2
c
(thelower median)andiD
d
.nC1/=2
e
(theupper median).  For simplicity in
this text, however, we consistently use the phrase “the median” to refer to the lower
median.
This chapter  addresses  the problem  of  selecting  theith order  statistic  from  a
set ofndistinct  numbers.  We assume for convenience  that the set contains dis-
tinct numbers, although virtually everything that we do extends to the situation in
which a set contains repeated values.  We formally specify theselection problem
as follows:
Input:A setAofn(distinct) numbers and an integeri, with1in.
Output:The elementx2Athat is larger than exactly
i1other elements ofA.
We can solve the selection problem inO.nlgn/time, since we can sort the num-
bers  using  heapsort  or  merge  sort  and  then  simply  index  theith  element  in the
output array. This chapter presents faster algorithms.
In Section 9.1,  we examine the problem of selecting the minimum and maxi-
mum of a set of elements. More interesting is the general selection problem, which
we investigate  in  the  subsequent  two  sections.   Section  9.2  analyzes  a  practical
randomized algorithm that achieves anO.n/expected running time, assuming dis-
tinct elements.  Section 9.3 contains an algorithm of more theoretical interest that
achieves theO.n/running time in the worst case.

214Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
9.1  Minimum and maximum
How  many  comparisons  are  necessary  to  determine  the  minimum  of  a  set  ofn
elements?  We can easily obtain an upper bound ofn1comparisons:  examine
each  element  of  the  set  in  turn  and  keep  track  of  the  smallest  element  seen  so
far.  In the following procedure, we assume that the set resides in arrayA,where
A:lengthDn.
M
INIMUM.A/
1minDAŒ1
2foriD2toA:length
3ifmin> AŒi 
4minDAŒi 
5returnmin
We can, of course, find the maximum withn1comparisons as well.
Is this the best we can do?  Yes, since we can obtain a lower bound ofn1
comparisons for the problem of determining the minimum. Think of any algorithm
that determines the minimum as a tournament among the elements. Each compar-
ison is a match in the tournament in which the smaller of the two elements wins.
Observing that every element except the winner must lose at least one match, we
conclude thatn1comparisons are necessary to determine the minimum. Hence,
the  algorithm  M
INIMUMis  optimal  with  respect  to  the  number  of  comparisons
performed.
Simultaneous minimum and maximum
In some applications, we must find both the minimum and the maximum of a set
ofnelements.  For example, a graphics program may need to scale a set of.x; y/
data to fit onto a rectangular display screen or other graphical output device.  To
do so, the program must first determine the minimum and maximum value of each
coordinate.
At this point, it should be obvious how to determine both the minimum and the
maximum ofnelements using‚.n/comparisons, which is asymptotically optimal:
simply find the minimum and maximum independently, usingn1comparisons
for each, for a total of2n2comparisons.
In fact, we can find both the minimum and the maximum using at most3
b
n=2
c
comparisons. We do so by maintaining both the minimum and maximum elements
seen thus far.  Rather than processing each element of the input by comparing it
against the current minimum and maximum, at a cost of2comparisons per element,

9.2Selection in expected linear time215
we process elements in pairs.  We compare pairs of elements from the input first
with each other, and then we compare the smaller with the current minimum and
the larger to the current maximum, at a cost of3comparisons for every2elements.
How we set up initial values for the current minimum and maximum depends
on whethernis odd or even.  Ifnis odd, we set both the minimum and maximum
to the value of the first element,  and then we process the rest of the elements in
pairs.  Ifnis even, we perform1comparison on the first2elements to determine
the initial values of the minimum and maximum, and then process the rest of the
elements in pairs as in the case for oddn.
Let us analyze the total number of comparisons.  Ifnis odd, then we perform
3
b
n=2
c
comparisons.  Ifnis even, we perform1initial comparison followed by
3.n2/=2comparisons,  for a total of3n=22.  Thus, in either case, the total
number of comparisons is at most3
b
n=2
c
.
Exercises
9.1-1
Show that the second  smallest  ofnelements  can be found withnC
d
lgn
e
2
comparisons in the worst case. (Hint:Also find the smallest element.)
9.1-2?
Prove the lower bound of
d
3n=2
e
2comparisons in the worst case to find both
the maximum and minimum ofnnumbers.  (Hint:Consider how many numbers
are potentially either the maximum or minimum, and investigate how a comparison
affects these counts.)
9.2  Selection in expected linear time
The general selection problem appears more difficult than the simple problem of
finding a minimum.  Yet, surprisingly, the asymptotic running time for both prob-
lems is the same:‚.n/. In this section, we present a divide-and-conquer algorithm
for the selection problem. The algorithm R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTis modeled after
the quicksort algorithm of Chapter 7. As in quicksort, we partition the input array
recursively.   But unlike  quicksort,  which recursively  processes  both sides of the
partition,  R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTworks on only one side of the partition.   This
difference shows up in the analysis:  whereas quicksort  has an expected running
time of‚.nlgn/, the expected running time of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTis‚.n/,
assuming that the elements are distinct.

216Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
RANDOMIZED-SELECTuses  the  procedure  RANDOMIZED-PARTITIONintro-
duced in Section 7.3. Thus, like R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, it is a randomized al-
gorithm, since its behavior is determined in part by the output of a random-number
generator. The following code for R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTreturns theith smallest
element of the arrayAŒp : : r .
R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT.A;p;r;i/
1ifp
==r
2returnAŒp
3qDR
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION.A;p;r/
4kDqpC1
5ifi
==k//the pivot value is the answer
6returnAŒq
7elseifi<k
8returnR
ANDOMIZED-SELECT.A;p;q1; i /
9else returnR
ANDOMIZED-SELECT.A; qC1; r; ik/
The R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTprocedure works as follows. Line 1 checks for the
base  case  of  the  recursion,  in  which  the  subarrayAŒp : : r consists  of  just  one
element.  In this case,imust equal1, and we simply returnAŒpin line 2 as the
ith smallest element.  Otherwise, the call to R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITIONin line 3
partitions  the  arrayAŒp : : r into  two  (possibly  empty)  subarraysAŒp : : q1
andAŒqC1::rsuch  that  each  element  ofAŒp : : q1is  less  than  or  equal
toAŒq, which in turn is less than each element ofAŒqC1::r.  As in quicksort,
we  will  refer  toAŒqas  thepivotelement.   Line  4  computes  the  numberkof
elements in the subarrayAŒp : : q, that is, the number of elements in the low side
of the partition, plus one for the pivot element. Line 5 then checks whetherAŒqis
theith smallest element. If it is, then line 6 returnsAŒq. Otherwise, the algorithm
determines in which of the two subarraysAŒp : : q1andAŒqC1::rtheith
smallest element lies.  Ifi<k, then the desired element lies on the low side of
the partition, and line 8 recursively selects it from the subarray. Ifi>k,however,
then the desired element lies on the high side of the partition.  Since we already
knowkvalues that are smaller than theith smallest element ofAŒp : : r —namely,
the elements ofAŒp : : q—the desired element is the.ik/th smallest element
ofAŒqC1::r, which line 9 finds recursively. The code appears to allow recursive
calls to subarrays with0elements, but Exercise 9.2-1 asks you to show that this
situation cannot happen.
The worst-case running time for R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTis‚.n
2
/,eventofind
the minimum, because we could be extremely unlucky and always partition around
the largest remaining element, and partitioning takes‚.n/time.  We will see that

9.2Selection in expected linear time217
the algorithm has a linear expected running time, though, and because it is random-
ized, no particular input elicits the worst-case behavior.
To analyze the expected running time of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT, we let the run-
ning time on an input arrayAŒp : : r ofnelements be a random variable that we
denote byT .n/, and we obtain an upper bound on EŒT .n/as follows.  The pro-
cedure  R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITIONis equally likely to return any element as the
pivot. Therefore, for eachksuch that1kn, the subarrayAŒp : : qhaskele-
ments (all less than or equal to the pivot) with probability1=n.ForkD1;2;:::;n,
we define indicator random variablesX
k
where
X
k
DI
f
the subarrayAŒp : : qhas exactlykelements
g
;
and so, assuming that the elements are distinct, we have
EŒX
k
D1=n :(9.1)
When we call R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTand chooseAŒqas the pivot element, we
do not know, a priori,  if we will terminate immediately with the correct answer,
recurse  on the  subarrayAŒp : : q1,  or  recurse  on  the subarrayAŒqC1::r.
This  decision  depends  on  where  theith  smallest  element  falls  relative  toAŒq.
Assuming  thatT .n/is  monotonically  increasing,  we can  upper-bound  the  time
needed for the recursive call by the time needed for the recursive call on the largest
possible input.  In other words, to obtain an upper bound, we assume that theith
element is always on the side of the partition with the greater number of elements.
For a given call of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT, the indicator random variableX
k
has
the value1for exactly one value ofk, and it is0for all otherk.WhenX
k
D1,the
two subarrays on which we might recurse have sizesk1andnk. Hence, we
have the recurrence
T .n/
n
X
kD1
X
k
.T .max.k1; nk//CO.n//
D
n
X
kD1
X
k
T.max.k1; nk//CO.n/ :

218Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
Taking expected values, we have
EŒT .n/
E
"
n
X
kD1
X
k
T.max.k1; nk//CO.n/
#
D
n
X
kD1
EŒX
k
T.max.k1; nk//CO.n/(by linearity of expectation)
D
n
X
kD1
EŒX
k
EŒT .max.k1; nk//CO.n/(by equation (C.24))
D
n
X
kD1
1
n
EŒT .max.k1; nk//CO.n/(by equation (9.1))  .
In order to apply equation (C.24), we rely onX
k
andT.max.k1; nk//being
independent random variables. Exercise 9.2-2 asks you to justify this assertion.
Let us consider the expression max.k1; nk/.Wehave
max.k1; nk/D
(
k1ifk>
d
n=2
e
;
nkifk
d
n=2
e
:
Ifnis even,  each term fromT.
d
n=2
e
/up toT.n1/appears exactly twice in
the summation, and ifnis odd, all these terms appear twice andT.
b
n=2
c
/appears
once. Thus, we have
EŒT .n/
2
n
n1
X
kDbn=2c
EŒT .k/CO.n/ :
We show that EŒT .n/DO.n/by substitution.  Assume that EŒT .n/cnfor
some constantcthat satisfies the initial conditions of the recurrence.  We assume
thatT .n/DO.1/fornless than some constant; we shall pick this constant later.
We also pick a constantasuch that the function described by theO.n/term above
(which  describes  the  non-recursive  component  of  the  running  time  of  the  algo-
rithm) is bounded from above byanfor alln>0. Using this inductive hypothesis,
we have
EŒT .n/
2
n
n1
X
kDbn=2c
ckCan
D
2c
n
 
n1
X
kD1
k
bn=2c1
X
kD1
k
!
Can

9.2Selection in expected linear time219
D
2c
n

.n1/n
2

.
b
n=2
c
1/
b
n=2
c
2

Can

2c
n

.n1/n
2

.n=22/.n=21/
2

Can
D
2c
n

n
2
n
2

n
2
=43n=2C2
2

Can
D
c
n

3n
2
4
C
n
2
2

Can
Dc

3n
4
C
1
2

2
n

Can

3cn
4
C
c
2
Can
Dcn

cn
4

c
2
an

:
In order to complete the proof, we need to show that for sufficiently largen,this
last expression is at mostcnor, equivalently,  thatcn=4c=2an0.Ifwe
addc=2to both sides and factor outn,wegetn.c=4a/c=2.  As long as we
choose the constantcso thatc=4a>0, i.e.,c>4a, we can divide both sides
byc=4a,giving
n
c=2
c=4a
D
2c
c4a
:
Thus, if we assume thatT .n/DO.1/forn<2c=.c4a/,thenEŒT .n/DO.n/.
We conclude that we can find any order statistic, and in particular the median, in
expected linear time, assuming that the elements are distinct.
Exercises
9.2-1
Show that R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTnever makes a recursive call to a0-length array.
9.2-2
Argue that the indicator random variableX
k
and the valueT.max.k1; nk//
are independent.
9.2-3
Write an iterative version of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT.

220Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
9.2-4
Suppose  we  use  R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTto  select  the  minimum  element  of  the
arrayADh3; 2; 9; 0; 7; 5; 4; 8; 6; 1i. Describe a sequence of partitions that results
in a worst-case performance of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT.
9.3  Selection in worst-case linear time
We now examine a selection algorithm whose running time isO.n/in the worst
case.  Like R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT,  the algorithm SELECTfinds the desired ele-
ment by recursively partitioning the input array.  Here, however, weguaranteea
good split upon partitioning the array.  S
ELECTuses the deterministic partitioning
algorithm  P
ARTITIONfrom quicksort  (see Section 7.1),  but modified to take the
element to partition around as an input parameter.
The S
ELECTalgorithm determines theith smallest of an input array ofn>1
distinct elements by executing the following steps. (IfnD1,thenS
ELECTmerely
returns its only input value as theith smallest.)
1.   Divide thenelements of the input array into
b
n=5
c
groups of5elements each
and at most one group made up of the remainingnmod5elements.
2.   Find the median of each of the
d
n=5
e
groups by first insertion-sorting the ele-
ments of each group (of which there are at most5) and then picking the median
from the sorted list of group elements.
3.   Use S
ELECTrecursively to find the medianxof the
d
n=5
e
medians found in
step 2.  (If there are an even number of medians, then by our convention,xis
the lower median.)
4.   Partition the input array around the median-of-mediansxusing the modified
version of P
ARTITION.Letkbe one more than the number of elements on the
low side of the partition, so thatxis thekth smallest element and there arenk
elements on the high side of the partition.
5.   IfiDk,  then returnx.   Otherwise,  use  S
ELECTrecursively  to find theith
smallest element on the low side ifi<k,orthe.ik/th smallest element on
the high side ifi>k.
To analyze the running time of S
ELECT, we first determine a lower bound on the
number  of elements that are greater  than the partitioning  elementx.  Figure 9.1
helps  us  to  visualize  this  bookkeeping.   At  least  half  of  the  medians  found  in

9.3Selection in worst-case linear time221
x
Figure 9.1Analysis of the algorithm SELECT.Thenelements are represented by small circles,
and each group of5elements occupies a column.  The medians of the groups are whitened, and the
median-of-mediansxis labeled.  (When finding the median of an even number of elements, we use
the lower median.)  Arrows go from larger elements to smaller, from which we can see that3out
of every full group of5elements to the right ofxare greater thanx,and3out of every group of5
elements to the left ofxare less thanx. The elements known to be greater thanxappear on a shaded
background.
step 2 are greater than or equal to the median-of-mediansx.
1
Thus, at least half
of the
d
n=5
e
groups contribute at least3elements that are greater thanx, except
for the one group that has fewer than5elements if5does not dividenexactly, and
the one group containingxitself. Discounting these two groups, it follows that the
number of elements greater thanxis at least
3

1
2
l
n
5
m

2


3n
10
6:
Similarly,  at least3n=106elements are less thanx.  Thus,  in the worst case,
step 5 calls S
ELECTrecursively on at most7n=10C6elements.
We can now develop a recurrence for the worst-case running timeT .n/of the
algorithm  S
ELECT.  Steps 1, 2, and 4 takeO.n/time.  (Step 2 consists ofO.n/
calls of insertion sort on sets of sizeO.1/.) Step 3 takes timeT.
d
n=5
e
/, and step 5
takes time at mostT.7n=10C6/, assuming thatTis monotonically  increasing.
We make the assumption, which seems unmotivated at first, that any input of fewer
than 140 elements requiresO.1/time; the origin of the magic constant 140 will be
clear shortly. We can therefore obtain the recurrence
1
Because of our assumption that the numbers are distinct, all medians exceptxare either greater
than or less thanx.

222Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
T .n/
(
O.1/ifn < 140 ;
T.
d
n=5
e
/CT.7n=10C6/CO.n/ifn140 :
We show that the running time is linear by substitution. More specifically, we will
show thatT .n/cnfor some suitably large constantcand alln>0.Webeginby
assuming thatT .n/cnfor some suitably large constantcand alln < 140;this
assumption holds ifcis large enough. We also pick a constantasuch that the func-
tion described by theO.n/term above (which describes the non-recursive compo-
nent of the running time of the algorithm) is bounded above byanfor alln>0.
Substituting  this  inductive  hypothesis  into  the  right-hand  side  of  the  recurrence
yields
T .n/c
d
n=5
e
Cc.7n=10C6/Can
cn=5CcC7cn=10C6cCan
D9cn=10C7cCan
DcnC.cn=10C7cCan/ ;
which is at mostcnif
cn=10C7cCan
0:(9.2)
Inequality (9.2) is equivalent to the inequalityc10a.n=.n70//whenn>70.
Because  we  assume  thatn140,wehaven=.n70/2,  and  so  choos-
ingc20awill satisfy inequality (9.2).  (Note that there is nothing special about
the constant  140;  we could replace it by any integer strictly greater  than 70 and
then choosecaccordingly.)  The worst-case running time of S
ELECTis therefore
linear.
As in a comparison sort (see Section 8.1), S
ELECTand RANDOMIZED-SELECT
determine information about the relative order of elements only by comparing ele-
ments.  Recall from Chapter 8 that sorting requires.nlgn/time in the compari-
son model, even on average (see Problem 8-1). The linear-time sorting algorithms
in Chapter  8 make assumptions  about the input.   In contrast,  the linear-time  se-
lection algorithms in this chapter do not require any assumptions about the input.
They are not subject to the.nlgn/lower bound because they manage to solve
the selection problem without sorting. Thus, solving the selection problem by sort-
ing and indexing, as presented in the introduction to this chapter, is asymptotically
inefficient.

9.3Selection in worst-case linear time223
Exercises
9.3-1
In the algorithm  S
ELECT,  the input elements are divided into groups of5.  Will
the algorithm work in linear time if they are divided into groups of7?  Argue that
S
ELECTdoes not run in linear time if groups of3are used.
9.3-2
Analyze S
ELECTto show that ifn140, then at least
d
n=4
e
elements are greater
than the median-of-mediansxand at least
d
n=4
e
elements are less thanx.
9.3-3
Show how quicksort can be made to run inO.nlgn/time in the worst case, as-
suming that all elements are distinct.
9.3-4?
Suppose that an algorithm uses only comparisons to find theith smallest element
in a set ofnelements.  Show that it can also find thei1smaller elements and
thenilarger elements without performing any additional comparisons.
9.3-5
Suppose  that  you have a “black-box”  worst-case  linear-time  median  subroutine.
Give a simple, linear-time algorithm that solves the selection problem for an arbi-
trary order statistic.
9.3-6
Thekthquantilesof ann-element set are thek1order statistics that divide the
sorted set intokequal-sized sets (to within1).  Give anO.nlgk/-time algorithm
to list thekth quantiles of a set.
9.3-7
Describe  anO.n/-time algorithm  that,  given  a setSofndistinct  numbers  and
a positive integerkn,  determines  theknumbers inSthat are closest to the
median ofS.
9.3-8
LetXŒ1::nandYŒ1::nbe two arrays,  each containingnnumbers already  in
sorted order. Give anO.lgn/-time algorithm to find the median of all
2nelements
in arraysXandY.
9.3-9
Professor Olay is consulting for an oil company, which is planning a large pipeline
running east to west through an oil field ofnwells. The company wants to connect

224Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
Figure 9.2Professor Olay needs to determine the position of the east-west oil pipeline that mini-
mizes the total length of the north-south spurs.
a spur pipeline from each well directly to the main pipeline along a shortest route
(either north or south), as shown in Figure 9.2.  Given thex-andy-coordinates of
the wells, how should the professor pick the optimal location of the main pipeline,
which would be the one that minimizes the total length of the spurs? Show how to
determine the optimal location in linear time.
Problems
9-1  Largestinumbers in sorted order
Given a set  ofnnumbers,  we wish to find theilargest  in sorted  order  using  a
comparison-based algorithm.  Find the algorithm that implements each of the fol-
lowing methods with the best asymptotic worst-case running time, and analyze the
running times of the algorithms in terms ofnandi.
a.Sort the numbers, and list theilargest.
b.Build a max-priority queue from the numbers, and call E
XTRACT-MAXitimes.
c.Use an order-statistic algorithm to find theith largest number, partition around
that number, and sort theilargest numbers.

Problems for Chapter 9225
9-2  Weighted median
Forndistinct elementsx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
with positive weightsw
1
;w
2
;:::;w
n
such
that
P
n
iD1
w
i
D1,theweighted (lower) medianis the elementx
k
satisfying
X
x
i
<x
k
w
i
<
1
2
and
X
x
i
>x
k
w
i

1
2
:
For example, if the elements are0:1; 0:35; 0:05; 0:1; 0:15; 0:05; 0:2and each ele-
ment equals its weight (that is,w
i
Dx
i
foriD1;2;:::;7), then the median is0:1,
but the weighted median is0:2.
a.Argue that the median ofx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
is the weighted median of thex
i
with
weightsw
i
D1=nforiD1;2;:::;n.
b.Show how to compute the weighted median ofnelements inO.nlgn/worst-
case time using sorting.
c.Show how to compute the weighted median in‚.n/worst-case time using a
linear-time median algorithm such as S
ELECTfrom Section 9.3.
Thepost-office location problemis  defined  as  follows.   We  are  givennpoints
p
1
;p
2
;:::;p
n
with associated weightsw
1
;w
2
;:::;w
n
. We wish to find a pointp
(not necessarily one of the input points) that minimizes the sum
P
n
iD1
w
i
d.p; p
i
/,
whered.a; b/is the distance between pointsaandb.
d.Argue that the weighted median is a best solution for the 1-dimensional post-
office location problem, in which points are simply real numbers and the dis-
tance between pointsaandbisd.a; b/D
j
ab
j
.
e.Find the best  solution  for  the 2-dimensional  post-office  location  problem,  in
which the points are.x; y/coordinate  pairs and the distance  between points
aD.x
1
;y
1
/andbD.x
2
;y
2
/is theManhattan distancegiven byd.a; b/D
j
x
1
x
2
j
C
j
y
1
y
2
j
.
9-3  Small order statistics
We  showed  that  the  worst-case  numberT .n/of  comparisons  used  by  S
ELECT
to select  theith order  statistic  fromnnumbers  satisfiesT .n/D‚.n/,butthe
constant hidden by the‚-notation is rather large. Wheniis small relative ton,we
can implement a different procedure that uses S
ELECTas a subroutine but makes
fewer comparisons in the worst case.

226Chapter 9Medians and Order Statistics
a.Describe an algorithm that usesU
i
.n/comparisons to find theith smallest ofn
elements, where
U
i
.n/D
(
T .n/ifin=2 ;
b
n=2
c
CU
i
.
d
n=2
e
/CT.2i/otherwise:
(Hint:Begin with
b
n=2
c
disjoint pairwise comparisons, and recurse on the set
containing the smaller element from each pair.)
b.Show that, ifi<n=2,thenU
i
.n/DnCO.T .2i/lg.n= i //.
c.Show that ifiis a constant less thann=2,thenU
i
.n/DnCO.lgn/.
d.Show that ifiDn=kfork2,thenU
i
.n/DnCO.T .2n=k/lgk/.
9-4  Alternative analysis of randomized selection
In this problem, we use indicator random variables to analyze the R
ANDOMIZED-
S
ELECTprocedure in a manner akin to our analysis of RANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT
in Section 7.4.2.
As in the quicksort analysis,  we assume that all elements are distinct,  and we
rename  the  elements  of  the  input  arrayAas ́
1
; ́
2
;:::; ́
n
,where ́
i
is theith
smallest element. Thus, the call R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT.A;1;n;k/returns ́
k
.
For1i<jn,let
X
ij k
DI
f
 ́
i
is compared with ́
j
sometime during the execution of the algorithm
to find ́
k
g
:
a.Give an exact expression for EŒX
ij k
.(Hint:Your expression may have differ-
ent values, depending on the values ofi,j,andk.)
b.LetX
k
denote the total number of comparisons between elements of arrayA
when finding ́
k
. Show that
EŒX
k
2
 
k
X
iD1
n
X
jDk
1
jiC1
C
n
X
jDkC1
jk1
jkC1
C
k2
X
iD1
ki1
kiC1
!
:
c.Show that EŒX
k
4n.
d.Conclude that, assuming all elements of arrayAare distinct,  R
ANDOMIZED-
S
ELECTruns in expected timeO.n/.

Notes for Chapter 9227
Chapter notes
The worst-case linear-time median-finding algorithm was devised by Blum, Floyd,
Pratt, Rivest, and Tarjan [50].  The fast randomized version is due to Hoare [169].
Floyd and Rivest [108] have developed an improved randomized version that parti-
tions around an element recursively selected from a small sample of the elements.
It is still unknown exactly how many comparisons are needed to determine the
median.  Bent and John [41] gave a lower bound of2ncomparisons for median
finding, and Sch  ̈onhage, Paterson, and Pippenger [302] gave an upper bound of3n.
Dor and Zwick have improved on both of these bounds.  Their upper bound [93]
is slightly  less  than2:95n,  and  their  lower  bound  [94]  is.2C/n,forasmall
positive constant, thereby improving slightly on related work by Dor et al. [92].
Paterson [272] describes some of these results along with other related work.

III  Data Structures

Introduction
Sets are as fundamental to computer science as they are to mathematics.  Whereas
mathematical sets are unchanging,  the sets manipulated by algorithms can grow,
shrink, or otherwise change over time.  We call such setsdynamic.  The next five
chapters  present  some basic  techniques  for  representing  finite dynamic  sets and
manipulating them on a computer.
Algorithms may require several different types of operations to be performed on
sets.  For example, many algorithms need only the ability to insert elements into,
delete elements from,  and test membership in a set.  We call a dynamic set that
supports these operations adictionary. Other algorithms require more complicated
operations.  For example, min-priority queues, which Chapter 6 introduced in the
context of the heap data structure, support the operations of inserting an element
into and extracting the smallest element from a set.  The best way to implement a
dynamic set depends upon the operations that must be supported.
Elements of a dynamic set
In a typical implementation of a dynamic set, each element is represented by an
object whose attributes can be examined and manipulated if we have a pointer to
the object.  (Section 10.3 discusses the implementation of objects and pointers in
programming environments that do not contain them as basic data types.)  Some
kinds of dynamic sets assume that one of the object’s attributes is an identifying
key.  If the keys are all different,  we can think of the dynamic set as being a set
of key values.  The object may containsatellite data, which are carried around in
other object attributes but are otherwise unused by the set implementation.  It may

230Part III    Data Structures
also have attributes that are manipulated by the set operations; these attributes may
contain data or pointers to other objects in the set.
Some dynamic sets presuppose that the keys are drawn from a totally ordered
set,  such as the real numbers,  or the set of all words under  the usual alphabetic
ordering.  A total ordering allows us to define the minimum element of the set, for
example, or to speak of the next element larger than a given element in a set.
Operations on dynamic sets
Operations on a dynamic set can be grouped into two categories:queries,which
simply return information about the set, andmodifying operations, which change
the set.  Here is a list of typical operations.  Any specific application will usually
require only a few of these to be implemented.
S
EARCH.S; k/
A query that, given a setSandakeyvaluek, returns a pointerxto an element
inSsuch thatx:keyDk,or
NILif no such element belongs toS.
I
NSERT.S; x/
A  modifying  operation  that  augments  the  setSwith  the  element  pointed  to
byx.  We usually  assume that any attributes  in elementxneeded by the set
implementation have already been initialized.
D
ELETE.S; x/
A modifying operation that, given a pointerxto an element in the setS,re-
movesxfromS. (Note that this operation takes a pointer to an elementx, not
akeyvalue.)
M
INIMUM.S /
A query on a totally ordered setSthat returns a pointer to the element ofS
with the smallest key.
M
AXIMUM.S /
A query on a totally ordered setSthat returns a pointer to the element ofS
with the largest key.
S
UCCESSOR.S; x/
A query that,  given an elementxwhose key is from a totally ordered setS,
returns a pointer to the next larger element inS,or
NILifxis the maximum
element.
P
REDECESSOR.S; x/
A query that,  given an elementxwhose key is from a totally ordered setS,
returns a pointer to the next smaller element inS,or
NILifxis the minimum
element.

Part IIIData Structures231
In some  situations,  we can  extend  the  queries  SUCCESSORand  PREDECESSOR
so that they apply to sets with nondistinct keys.  For a set onnkeys, the normal
presumption is that a call to M
INIMUMfollowed byn1calls to SUCCESSOR
enumerates the elements in the set in sorted order.
We usually measure the time taken to execute a set operation in terms of the size
of the set. For example, Chapter 13 describes a data structure that can support any
of the operations listed above on a set of sizenin timeO.lgn/.
Overview of Part III
Chapters  10–14  describe  several  data  structures  that  we  can  use  to  implement
dynamic  sets;  we shall  use many of these  later  to construct  efficient  algorithms
for a variety of problems.  We already saw another important data structure—the
heap—in Chapter 6.
Chapter 10 presents the essentials of working with simple data structures such
as stacks, queues, linked lists, and rooted trees.  It also shows how to implement
objects  and  pointers  in  programming  environments  that  do  not  support  them  as
primitives.  If you have taken an introductory programming course, then much of
this material should be familiar to you.
Chapter 11 introduces hash tables, which support the dictionary operations I
N-
SERT,DELETE,andSEARCH. In the worst case, hashing requires‚.n/time to per-
form a S
EARCHoperation, but the expected time for hash-table operations isO.1/.
The analysis of hashing relies on probability, but most of the chapter requires no
background in the subject.
Binary search trees, which are covered in Chapter 12, support all the dynamic-
set operations listed above. In the worst case, each operation takes‚.n/time on a
tree withnelements, but on a randomly built binary search tree, the expected time
for each operation isO.lgn/. Binary search trees serve as the basis for many other
data structures.
Chapter 13 introduces red-black trees, which are a variant of binary search trees.
Unlike ordinary binary search trees, red-black trees are guaranteed to perform well:
operations takeO.lgn/time in the worst case. A red-black tree is a balanced search
tree; Chapter 18 in Part V presents another kind of balanced search tree, called a
B-tree. Although the mechanics of red-black trees are somewhat intricate, you can
glean most of their properties from the chapter without studying the mechanics in
detail.  Nevertheless, you probably will find walking through the code to be quite
instructive.
In Chapter 14, we show how to augment red-black trees to support operations
other  than  the  basic  ones  listed  above.   First,  we augment  them  so  that  we can
dynamically maintain order statistics for a set of keys.  Then, we augment them in
a different way to maintain intervals of real numbers.

10Elementary Data Structures
In this chapter, we examine the representation of dynamic sets by simple data struc-
tures that use pointers.  Although we can construct many complex data structures
using pointers, we present only the rudimentary ones:  stacks, queues, linked lists,
and rooted trees.  We also show ways to synthesize objects and pointers from ar-
rays.
10.1  Stacks and queues
Stacks and queues are dynamic sets in which the element removed from the set
by  the  D
ELETEoperation  is  prespecified.   In astack,  the  element  deleted  from
the set is the one most recently inserted:  the stack implements alast-in, first-out,
orLIFO, policy.  Similarly, in aqueue, the element deleted is always the one that
has been in the set for the longest time:  the queue implements afirst-in, first-out,
orFIFO, policy.  There are several efficient ways to implement stacks and queues
on a computer.  In this section we show how to use a simple array to implement
each.
Stacks
The I
NSERToperation  on a stack is often called  PUSH,andtheDELETEopera-
tion, which does not take an element argument, is often called P
OP.  These names
are  allusions  to physical  stacks,  such  as the  spring-loaded  stacks  of  plates  used
in cafeterias.  The order in which plates are popped from the stack is the reverse
of the order in which they were pushed onto the stack, since only the top plate is
accessible.
As Figure 10.1 shows,  we can implement  a stack of at mostnelements with
an arraySŒ1::n.  The array has an attributeS:topthat indexes the most recently

10.1Stacks and queues233
1234567
S15629
1234567
S15   6    2    9   17   3
1234567
S15   6    2    9   17   3
(a)(b)(c)
S:topD4S:topD6S:topD5
Figure 10.1An array implementation of a stackS. Stack elements appear only in the lightly shaded
positions.(a)StackShas 4 elements. The top element is 9.(b)StackSafter the calls P
USH.S; 17/
and P
USH.S; 3/.(c)StackSafter the call POP.S /has returned the element 3, which is the one most
recently pushed.  Although element 3 still appears in the array, it is no longer in the stack; the top is
element 17.
inserted element.  The stack consists of elementsSŒ1::S:top,whereSŒ1is the
element at the bottom of the stack andSŒS:topis the element at the top.
WhenS:topD0, the stack contains no elements and isempty.  We can test to
see whether the stack is empty by query operation S
TAC K-EMPTY.  If we attempt
to pop an empty stack, we say the stackunderflows, which is normally an error.
IfS:topexceedsn, the stackoverflows.  (In our pseudocode implementation,  we
don’t worry about stack overflow.)
We can implement each of the stack operations with just a few lines of code:
S
TAC K-EMPTY.S /
1ifS:top
==0
2return
TRUE
3else returnFALSE
PUSH.S; x/
1S:topDS:topC1
2SŒS:topDx
P
OP.S /
1ifS
TAC K-EMPTY.S /
2error“underflow”
3elseS:topDS:top1
4returnSŒS:topC1
Figure 10.1 shows the effects of the modifying operations P
USHand POP. Each of
the three stack operations takesO.1/time.

234Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
123456789101112
Q(a)156984
123456789101112
Q(b)1569843517
123456789101112
Q(c)1569843517
Q:headD7
Q:headD7
Q:tailD12
Q:tailD3
Q:tailD3
Q:headD8
Figure 10.2A queue implemented using an arrayQŒ1 : : 12.  Queue elements appear only in the
lightly shaded positions.(a)The queue has 5 elements, in locationsQŒ7 : : 11.(b)The configuration
of  the  queue  after  the  calls  E
NQUEUE.Q; 17/,ENQUEUE.Q; 3/,andENQUEUE.Q; 5/.(c)The
configuration  of  the  queue  after  the  call  D
EQUEUE.Q/returns  the  key  value  15  formerly  at  the
head of the queue. The new head has key 6.
Queues
We  call  the  I
NSERToperation  on  a queue  ENQUEUE,  and  we call  the  DELETE
operation DEQUEUE; like the stack operation POP,DEQUEUEtakes no element ar-
gument. The FIFO property of a queue causes it to operate like a line of customers
waiting to pay a cashier. The queue has aheadand atail. When an element is en-
queued, it takes its place at the tail of the queue, just as a newly arriving customer
takes a place at the end of the line.  The element dequeued is always the one at
the head of the queue, like the customer at the head of the line who has waited the
longest.
Figure 10.2 shows one way to implement  a queue of at mostn1elements
using an arrayQŒ1 : : n. The queue has an attributeQ:headthat indexes, or points
to, its head.  The attributeQ:tailindexes the next location at which a newly arriv-
ing element will be inserted into the queue.  The elements in the queue reside in
locationsQ:head;Q:headC1;:::;Q:tail1, where we “wrap around” in the
sense  that  location1immediately  follows  locationnin  a circular  order.   When
Q:headDQ:tail, the queue is empty.  Initially, we haveQ:headDQ:tailD1.
If we attempt to dequeue an element from an empty queue, the queue underflows.

10.1Stacks and queues235
WhenQ:headDQ:tailC1, the queue is full, and if we attempt to enqueue an
element, then the queue overflows.
In our procedures E
NQUEUEand DEQUEUE, we have omitted the error checking
for underflow and overflow.  (Exercise 10.1-4 asks you to supply code that checks
for these two error conditions.) The pseudocode assumes thatnDQ:length.
E
NQUEUE.Q; x/
1QŒQ:tailDx
2ifQ:tail
==Q:length
3Q:tailD1
4elseQ:tailDQ:tailC1
D
EQUEUE.Q/
1xDQŒQ:head
2ifQ:head
==Q:length
3Q:headD1
4elseQ:headDQ:headC1
5returnx
Figure 10.2 shows the effects of the E
NQUEUEand DEQUEUEoperations.  Each
operation takesO.1/time.
Exercises
10.1-1
Using Figure 10.1 as a model, illustrate the result of each operation in the sequence
P
USH.S; 4/,PUSH.S; 1/,PUSH.S; 3/,POP.S /,PUSH.S; 8/,andPOP.S /on  an
initially empty stackSstored in arraySŒ1::6.
10.1-2
Explain  how  to  implement  two stacks  in one  arrayAŒ1 : : nin such  a way that
neither stack overflows unless the total number of elements in both stacks together
isn.TheP
USHand POPoperations should run inO.1/time.
10.1-3
Using  Figure  10.2  as  a  model,  illustrate  the  result  of  each  operation  in  the
sequence  E
NQUEUE.Q; 4/,ENQUEUE.Q; 1/,ENQUEUE.Q; 3/,DEQUEUE.Q/,
E
NQUEUE.Q; 8/,andDEQUEUE.Q/on  an  initially  empty  queueQstored  in
arrayQŒ1::6.
10.1-4
Rewrite E
NQUEUEand DEQUEUEto detect underflow and overflow of aqueue.

236Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
10.1-5
Whereas a stack allows insertion and deletion of elements at only one end, and a
queue allows insertion at one end and deletion at the other end, adeque(double-
ended  queue)  allows insertion  and  deletion  at both  ends.   Write fourO.1/-time
procedures to insert elements into and delete elements from both ends of a deque
implemented by an array.
10.1-6
Show how to implement a queue using two stacks. Analyze the running time of the
queue operations.
10.1-7
Show how to implement a stack using two queues. Analyze the running time of the
stack operations.
10.2  Linked lists
Alinked listis a data structure in which the objects are arranged in a linear order.
Unlike  an  array,  however,  in  which  the  linear  order  is  determined  by  the  array
indices, the order in a linked list is determined by a pointer in each object. Linked
lists provide a simple, flexible representation for dynamic sets, supporting (though
not necessarily efficiently) all the operations listed on page 230.
As shown in Figure 10.3, each element of adoubly linked listLis an object with
an attributekeyand two other pointer attributes:nextandpre.  The object may
also contain other satellite data. Given an elementxin the list,x:nextpoints to its
successor in the linked list, andx:prepoints to its predecessor.  Ifx:preD
NIL,
the elementxhas no predecessor  and is therefore  the first element,  orhead,of
the list.  Ifx:nextD
NIL, the elementxhas no successor and is therefore the last
element, ortail, of the list.  An attributeL:headpoints to the first element of the
list. IfL:headD
NIL, the list is empty.
A list may have one of several forms.  It may be either singly linked or doubly
linked,  it may be sorted or not,  and it may be circular  or not.  If a list issingly
linked,weomittheprepointer in each element. If a list issorted, the linear order
of the list corresponds to the linear order of keys stored in elements of the list; the
minimum element  is then the head of the list,  and the maximum element  is the
tail. If the list isunsorted, the elements can appear in any order. In acircular list,
theprepointer of the head of the list points to the tail,  and thenextpointer of
the tail of the list points to the head.  We can think of a circular list as a ring of

10.2    Linked lists237
91641
prevkeynext
(a)
91641(b)25
9161(c)25L:head
L:head
L:head
Figure 10.3  (a)A doubly linked listLrepresenting the dynamic set
f
1; 4; 9; 16
g
. Each element in
the list is an object with attributes for the key and pointers (shown by arrows) to the next and previous
objects. Thenextattribute of the tail and thepreattribute of the head are
NIL, indicated by a diagonal
slash.  The attributeL:headpoints to the head.(b)Following the execution of L
IST-INSERT.L; x/,
wherex:keyD25, the linked list has a new object with key25as the new head.  This new object
points to the old head with key9.(c)The result of the subsequent call L
IST-DELETE.L; x/,wherex
points to the object with key4.
elements. In the remainder of this section, we assume that the lists with which we
are working are unsorted and doubly linked.
Searching a linked list
The procedure  L
IST-SEARCH.L; k/finds  the  first  element  with  keykin  listL
by a simple linear search,  returning  a pointer  to this element.   If no object with
keykappears  in the list,  then  the procedure  returns
NIL.   For the  linked  list  in
Figure 10.3(a), the call L
IST-SEARCH.L; 4/returns a pointer to the third element,
and the call L
IST-SEARCH.L; 7/returnsNIL.
L
IST-SEARCH.L; k/
1xDL:head
2whilex¤
NILandx:key¤k
3xDx:next
4returnx
To search a list ofnobjects, the L
IST-SEARCHprocedure takes‚.n/time in the
worst case, since it may have to search the entire list.
Inserting into a linked list
Givenanelementxwhosekeyattribute  has already  been  set,  the  L
IST-INSERT
procedure “splices”xonto the front of the linked list, as shown in Figure 10.3(b).

238Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
LIST-INSERT.L; x/
1x:nextDL:head
2ifL:head¤
NIL
3L:head:preDx
4L:headDx
5x:preD
NIL
(Recall that our attribute  notation can cascade,  so thatL:head:predenotes the
preattribute  of the object  thatL:headpoints to.)   The running  time for  L
IST-
I
NSERTon a list ofnelements isO.1/.
Deleting from a linked list
The procedure L
IST-DELETEremoves an elementxfrom a linked listL.Itmust
be given a pointer tox, and it then “splices”xout of the list by updating pointers.
If we wish to delete an element with a given key, we must first call L
IST-SEARCH
to retrieve a pointer to the element.
L
IST-DELETE.L; x/
1ifx:pre¤
NIL
2x:pre:nextDx:next
3elseL:headDx:next
4ifx:next¤
NIL
5x:next:preDx:pre
Figure 10.3(c) shows how an element is deleted from a linked list.  L
IST-DELETE
runs inO.1/time, but if we wish to delete an element with a given key,‚.n/time
is required in the worst case because we must first call L
IST-SEARCHto find the
element.
Sentinels
The  code  for  L
IST-DELETEwould  be  simpler  if  we could  ignore  the  boundary
conditions at the head and tail of the list:
L
IST-DELETE
0
.L; x/
1x:pre:nextDx:next
2x:next:preDx:pre
Asentinelis a dummy object that allows us to simplify boundary conditions.  For
example, suppose that we provide with listLan objectL:nilthat represents
NIL

10.2    Linked lists239
91641
9164125
916425
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
L:nil
L:nil
L:nil
L:nil
Figure 10.4A circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel.  The sentinelL:nilappears between the
head and tail.  The attributeL:headis no longer needed,  since we can access the head of the list
byL:nil:next.(a)An empty list.(b)The linked list from Figure 10.3(a), with key 9 at the head and
key 1 at the tail.(c)The list after executing L
IST-INSERT
0
.L; x/,wherex:keyD25. The new object
becomes the head of the list.(d)The list after deleting the object with key 1.  The new tail is the
object with key 4.
but has all the attributes of the other objects in the list.  Wherever we have a ref-
erence to
NILin list code, we replace it by a reference to the sentinelL:nil.As
shown in Figure 10.4, this change turns a regular doubly linked list into acircu-
lar, doubly linked list with a sentinel, in which the sentinelL:nillies between the
head and tail. The attributeL:nil:nextpoints to the head of the list, andL:nil:pre
points  to  the  tail.   Similarly,  both  thenextattribute  of  the  tail  and  thepreat-
tribute  of  the head  point  toL:nil.SinceL:nil:nextpoints  to  the  head,  we can
eliminate the attributeL:headaltogether, replacing references to it by references
toL:nil:next. Figure 10.4(a) shows that an empty list consists of just the sentinel,
and bothL:nil:nextandL:nil:prepoint toL:nil.
The code for L
IST-SEARCHremains the same as before, but with the references
to
NILandL:headchanged as specified above:
L
IST-SEARCH
0
.L; k/
1xDL:nil:next
2whilex¤L:nilandx:key¤k
3xDx:next
4returnx
We use the two-line procedure  L
IST-DELETE
0
from before to delete  an element
from the list. The following procedure inserts an element into the list:

240Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
LIST-INSERT
0
.L; x/
1x:nextDL:nil:next
2L:nil:next:preDx
3L:nil:nextDx
4x:preDL:nil
Figure 10.4 shows the effects of L
IST-INSERT
0
and LIST-DELETE
0
on a sample list.
Sentinels rarely reduce the asymptotic time bounds of data structure operations,
but they can reduce constant factors.  The gain from using sentinels within loops
is usually  a matter of clarity of code rather  than speed;  the linked list code,  for
example, becomes simpler when we use sentinels, but we save onlyO.1/time in
the L
IST-INSERT
0
and LIST-DELETE
0
procedures. In other situations, however, the
use of sentinels helps to tighten the code in a loop, thus reducing the coefficient of,
say,norn
2
in the running time.
We should use sentinels judiciously.  When there are many small lists, the extra
storage used by their sentinels  can represent  significant  wasted memory.  In this
book, we use sentinels only when they truly simplify the code.
Exercises
10.2-1
Can  you  implement  the  dynamic-set  operation  I
NSERTon  a  singly  linked  list
inO.1/time? How about D
ELETE?
10.2-2
Implement  a stack  using  a singly  linked  listL.   The operations  P
USHand  POP
should still takeO.1/time.
10.2-3
Implement a queue by a singly linked listL.  The operations E
NQUEUEand DE-
QUEUEshould still takeO.1/time.
10.2-4
As written, each loop iteration in the L
IST-SEARCH
0
procedure requires two tests:
one forx¤L:niland one forx:key¤k.  Show how to eliminate the test for
x¤L:nilin each iteration.
10.2-5
Implement the dictionary operations I
NSERT,DELETE,andSEARCHusing singly
linked, circular lists. What are the running times of your procedures?

10.3Implementing pointers and objects241
10.2-6
The dynamic-set operation U
NIONtakes two disjoint setsS
1
andS
2
as input, and
it returns  a setSDS
1
[S
2
consisting  of  all  the elements  ofS
1
andS
2
.The
setsS
1
andS
2
are usually destroyed by the operation. Show how to support UNION
inO.1/time using a suitable list data structure.
10.2-7
Give a‚.n/-time nonrecursive  procedure  that  reverses  a singly  linked  list  ofn
elements.   The procedure  should use no more than constant  storage beyond that
needed for the list itself.
10.2-8?
Explain how to implement doubly linked lists using only one pointer valuex:npper
item instead of the usual two (nextandpre). Assume that all pointer values can be
interpreted ask-bit integers, and definex:npto bex:npDx:nextXORx:pre,
thek-bit “exclusive-or” ofx:nextandx:pre.(Thevalue
NILis represented by0.)
Be sure to describe what information you need to access the head of the list. Show
how to implement the S
EARCH,INSERT,andDELETEoperations on such a list.
Also show how to reverse such a list inO.1/time.
10.3  Implementing pointers and objects
How do we implement pointers and objects in languages that do not provide them?
In this section, we shall see two ways of implementing linked data structures with-
out an explicit  pointer  data type.  We shall synthesize  objects and pointers  from
arrays and array indices.
A multiple-array representation of objects
We can represent a collection of objects that have the same attributes by using an
array for each attribute. As an example, Figure 10.5 shows how we can implement
the linked list of Figure 10.3(a) with three arrays.  The arraykeyholds the values
of the keys currently in the dynamic set, and the pointers reside in the arraysnext
andpre.  For a given array indexx, the array entrieskeyŒx,nextŒx,andpreŒx
represent an object in the linked list. Under this interpretation, a pointerxis simply
a common index into thekey,next,andprearrays.
In Figure 10.3(a),  the object with key4follows the object with key16in the
linked list.  In Figure 10.5, key4appears inkeyŒ2,andkey16appears inkeyŒ5,
and sonextŒ5D2andpreŒ2D5. Although the constant
NILappears in thenext

242Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
12345678
key
next
prev
L7
4    1169
325
527
Figure 10.5The linked list of Figure 10.3(a) represented by the arrayskey,next,andpre.  Each
vertical slice of the arrays represents a single object. Stored pointers correspond to the array indices
shown at the top; the arrows show how to interpret them. Lightly shaded object positions contain list
elements. The variableLkeeps the index of the head.
attribute of the tail and thepreattribute of the head,  we usually use an integer
(such as0or1) that cannot possibly represent an actual index into the arrays.  A
variableLholds the index of the head of the list.
A single-array representation of objects
The  words  in  a  computer  memory  are  typically  addressed  by  integers  from0
toM1,whereMis a suitably large integer.  In many programming languages,
an object occupies a contiguous set of locations in the computer memory. A pointer
is simply the address of the first memory location of the object, and we can address
other memory locations within the object by adding an offset to the pointer.
We can use the same strategy for implementing objects in programming envi-
ronments that do not provide explicit pointer data types. For example, Figure 10.6
shows  how  to use a single  arrayAto store  the linked  list  from  Figures  10.3(a)
and 10.5.  An object occupies a contiguous subarrayAŒj : : k.  Each attribute of
the object corresponds to an offset in the range from0tokj, and a pointer to
the object is the indexj. In Figure 10.6, the offsets corresponding tokey,next,and
preare 0, 1, and 2, respectively. To read the value ofi:pre, given a pointeri,we
add the valueiof the pointer to the offset2, thus readingAŒiC2.
The single-array representation is flexible in that it permits objects of different
lengths to be stored in the same array.  The problem of managing such a heteroge-
neous collection of objects is more difficult than the problem of managing a homo-
geneous collection, where all objects have the same attributes.  Since most of the
data structures we shall consider are composed of homogeneous elements, it will
be sufficient for our purposes to use the multiple-array representation of objects.

10.3Implementing pointers and objects243
12345678
A
L
41169744
9 101112131415161718192021222324
prev
next
key
19
131319
Figure 10.6The linked list of Figures 10.3(a) and 10.5 represented in a single arrayA.  Each list
element is an object  that occupies  a contiguous  subarray of  length 3 within the  array.   The three
attributeskey,next,andprecorrespond to the offsets 0, 1, and 2, respectively, within each object.
A pointer to an object is the index of the first element of the object. Objects containing list elements
are lightly shaded, and arrows show the list ordering.
Allocating and freeing objects
To insert a key into a dynamic set represented by a doubly linked list, we must al-
locate a pointer to a currently unused object in the linked-list representation. Thus,
it is useful to manage the storage of objects not currently used in the linked-list
representation  so that one can be allocated.  In some systems,  agarbage collec-
toris responsible for determining which objects are unused.  Many applications,
however, are simple enough that they can bear responsibility for returning an un-
used object to a storage manager.  We shall now explore the problem of allocating
and freeing (or deallocating) homogeneous objects using the example of a doubly
linked list represented by multiple arrays.
Suppose that the arrays in the multiple-array representation have lengthmand
that at some moment the dynamic set containsnmelements.  Thennobjects
represent elements currently in the dynamic set, and the remainingmnobjects are
free; the free objects are available to represent elements inserted into the dynamic
set in the future.
We keep the free objects in a singly linked list, which we call thefree list.The
free  list  uses  only  thenextarray,  which  stores  thenextpointers  within  the  list.
The head of the free list is held  in the global  variablefree.   When the dynamic
set represented by linked listLis nonempty, the free list may be intertwined with
listL, as shown in Figure 10.7. Note that each object in the representation is either
in listLor in the free list, but not in both.
The free list acts like a stack: the next object allocated is the last one freed.  We
can use a list implementation of the stack operations P
USHand POPto implement
the procedures for allocating and freeing objects, respectively. We assume that the
global variablefreeused in the following procedures points to the first element of
the free list.

244Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
12345678
key
next
prev
L7
4    1169
325
527
4
861
free
(a)
12345678
key
next
prev
L4
4    1169
325
527
8
761
free
(b)
4
25
12345678
key
next
prev
L4
419
382
72
5
761
free
(c)
4
25
Figure 10.7The effect of the  ALLOCATE-OBJECTand  FREE-OBJECTprocedures.(a)The list
of Figure 10.5 (lightly shaded) and a free list (heavily shaded).  Arrows show the free-list structure.
(b)The result of calling  A
LLOCATE-OBJECT./(which returns index 4),  settingkeyŒ4to 25,  and
calling L
IST-INSERT.L; 4/.  The new free-list head is object 8, which had beennextŒ4on the free
list.(c)After executing L
IST-DELETE.L; 5/, we call FREE-OBJECT.5/. Object 5 becomes the new
free-list head, with object 8 following it on the free list.
ALLOCATE-OBJECT./
1iffree
==NIL
2error“out of space”
3elsexDfree
4freeDx:next
5returnx
F
REE-OBJECT.x/
1x:nextDfree
2freeDx
The free list initially contains allnunallocated objects. Once the free list has been
exhausted,  running the A
LLOCATE-OBJECTprocedure  signals an error.  We can
even service several linked lists with just a single free list.  Figure 10.8 shows two
linked lists and a free list intertwined throughkey,next,andprearrays.
The two procedures run inO.1/time, which makes them quite practical.  We
can modify them to work for any homogeneous collection of objects by letting any
one of the attributes in the object act like anextattribute in the free list.

10.3Implementing pointers and objects245
12345678910
next
key
prev
free
3
62
63
715
79
9
10
48
1
L
2
L
1
k
1
k
2
k
3
k
5
k
6
k
7
k
9
Figure 10.8Two linked lists,L
1
(lightly shaded) andL
2
(heavily shaded),and a free list (dark-
ened) intertwined.
Exercises
10.3-1
Draw a picture of the sequenceh13; 4; 8; 19; 5; 11istored as a doubly linked list
using the multiple-array representation. Do the same for the single-array represen-
tation.
10.3-2
Write the procedures A
LLOCATE-OBJECTand FREE-OBJECTfor a homogeneous
collection of objects implemented by the single-array representation.
10.3-3
Why don’t we need to set or reset thepreattributes of objects in the implementa-
tion of the A
LLOCATE-OBJECTand FREE-OBJECTprocedures?
10.3-4
It is often desirable to keep all elements of a doubly linked list compact in storage,
using, for example, the firstmindex locations in the multiple-array representation.
(This is  the case  in  a paged,  virtual-memory  computing  environment.)   Explain
how to implement the procedures A
LLOCATE-OBJECTand FREE-OBJECTso that
the representation is compact. Assume that there are no pointers to elements of the
linked list outside the list itself. (Hint:Use the array implementation of a stack.)
10.3-5
LetLbe a doubly linked list of lengthnstored in arrayskey,pre,andnextof
lengthm.   Suppose  that  these  arrays  are  managed  by  A
LLOCATE-OBJECTand
F
REE-OBJECTprocedures that keep a doubly linked free listF.  Suppose further
that of themitems, exactlynare on listLandmnare on the free list.  Write
a procedure  C
OMPACTIFY-LIST.L; F /that, given the listLand the free listF,
moves the items inLso that they occupy array positions1;2;:::;nand adjusts the
free listFso that it remains correct, occupying array positionsnC1; nC2;:::;m.
The  running  time  of  your  procedure  should  be‚.n/,  and  it  should  use  only  a
constant amount of extra space. Argue that your procedure is correct.

246Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
10.4  Representing rooted trees
The methods for representing lists given in the previous section extend to any ho-
mogeneous data structure.  In this section, we look specifically at the problem of
representing rooted trees by linked data structures.  We first look at binary trees,
and then we present a method for rooted trees in which nodes can have an arbitrary
number of children.
We represent each node of a tree by an object.  As with linked lists, we assume
that  each node  contains  akeyattribute.   The remaining  attributes  of interest  are
pointers to other nodes, and they vary according to the type of tree.
Binary trees
Figure 10.9 shows how we use the attributesp,left,andrightto store pointers to
the parent, left child, and right child of each node in a binary treeT.Ifx:pD
NIL,
thenxis the root. If nodexhas no left child, thenx:leftD
NIL, and similarly for
the right child. The root of the entire treeTis pointed to by the attributeT:root.If
T:rootD
NIL, then the tree is empty.
Rooted trees with unbounded branching
We can extend the scheme for representing  a binary tree to any class of trees in
which the number of children of each node is at most some constantk: we replace
theleftandrightattributes bychild
1
;child
2
;:::;child
k
.  This scheme no longer
works when the number of children of a node is unbounded, since we do not know
how many attributes (arrays in the multiple-array representation) to allocate in ad-
vance.  Moreover, even if the number of childrenkis bounded by a large constant
but most nodes have a small number of children, we may waste a lot of memory.
Fortunately, there is a clever scheme to represent trees with arbitrary numbers of
children. It has the advantage of using onlyO.n/space for anyn-node rooted tree.
Theleft-child, right-sibling representationappears in Figure 10.10.   As before,
each  node  contains  a parent  pointerp,andT:rootpoints  to the  root  of  treeT.
Instead of having a pointer to each of its children, however, each nodexhas only
two pointers:
1.x:left-childpoints to the leftmost child of nodex,and
2.x:right-siblingpoints to the sibling ofximmediately to its right.
If nodexhas no children, thenx:left-childD
NIL, and if nodexis the rightmost
child of its parent, thenx:right-siblingD
NIL.

10.4Representing rooted trees247
T:root
Figure 10.9The representation of a binary treeT. Each nodexhas the attributesx:p(top),x:left
(lower left), andx:right(lower right). Thekeyattributes are not shown.
T:root
Figure 10.10The left-child, right-sibling representation of a treeT. Each nodexhas attributesx:p
(top),x:left-child(lower left), andx:right-sibling(lower right). Thekeyattributes are not shown.

248Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
Other tree representations
We sometimes represent  rooted  trees in other  ways.   In Chapter  6,  for example,
we represented a heap, which is based on a complete binary tree, by a single array
plus the index of the last node in the heap. The trees that appear in Chapter 21 are
traversed only toward the root, and so only the parent pointers are present;  there
are no pointers to children.  Many other schemes are possible.  Which scheme is
best depends on the application.
Exercises
10.4-1
Draw  the  binary  tree  rooted  at  index6that  is  represented  by  the  following  at-
tributes:
indexkeyleftright
1127 3
2158
NIL
3410NIL
4105 9
52
NILNIL
6181 4
77
NILNIL
8146 2
921
NILNIL
105NILNIL
10.4-2
Write anO.n/-time recursive procedure that, given ann-node binary tree, prints
out the key of each node in the tree.
10.4-3
Write  anO.n/-time  nonrecursive  procedure  that,  given  ann-node  binary  tree,
prints out the key of each node in the tree. Use a stack as an auxiliary data structure.
10.4-4
Write anO.n/-time procedure that prints all the keys of an arbitrary rooted tree
withnnodes, where the tree is stored using the left-child, right-sibling representa-
tion.
10.4-5?
Write  anO.n/-time  nonrecursive  procedure  that,  given  ann-node  binary  tree,
prints out the key of each node.  Use no more than constant  extra space outside

Problems for Chapter 10249
of the tree itself and do not modify the tree, even temporarily,  during the proce-
dure.
10.4-6?
The left-child,  right-sibling  representation  of  an  arbitrary  rooted  tree  uses  three
pointers  in  each  node:left-child,right-sibling,andparent.   From any  node,  its
parent can be reached and identified in constant  time and all its children can be
reached and identified in time linear in the number of children.  Show how to use
only two pointers and one boolean value in each node so that the parent of a node
or all of its children can be reached and identified in time linear in the number of
children.
Problems
10-1  Comparisons among lists
For each of the four types of lists in the following table,  what is the asymptotic
worst-case running time for each dynamic-set operation listed?
unsorted,sorted,unsorted,sorted,
singlysinglydoublydoubly
linkedlinkedlinkedlinked
SEARCH.L; k/
INSERT.L; x/
DELETE.L; x/
SUCCESSOR.L; x/
PREDECESSOR.L; x/
MINIMUM.L/
MAXIMUM.L/

250Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
10-2  Mergeable heaps using linked lists
Amergeable heapsupports the following operations: M
AKE-HEAP(which creates
an  empty  mergeable  heap),  I
NSERT,MINIMUM,EXTRACT-MIN,andUNION.
1
Show how to implement mergeable heaps using linked lists in each of the following
cases.  Try to make each operation as efficient as possible.  Analyze the running
time of each operation in terms of the size of the dynamic set(s) being operated on.
a.Lists are sorted.
b.Lists are unsorted.
c.Lists are unsorted, and dynamic sets to be merged are disjoint.
10-3  Searching a sorted compact list
Exercise 10.3-4 asked how we might maintain ann-element list compactly in the
firstnpositions of an array.  We shall assume that all keys are distinct and that the
compact list is also sorted, that is,keyŒi  <keyŒnextŒi for alliD1;2;:::;nsuch
thatnextŒi ¤
NIL.  We will also assume that we have a variableLthat contains
the index of the first element on the list.  Under these assumptions, you will show
that we can use the following randomized algorithm to search the list inO.
p
n/
expected time.
C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH.L;n;k/
1iDL
2whilei¤
NILandkeyŒi  < k
3jDR
ANDOM.1; n/
4ifkeyŒi  <keyŒj andkeyŒj k
5iDj
6ifkeyŒi 
==k
7returni
8iDnextŒi 
9ifi
==NILorkeyŒi  > k
10return
NIL
11else returni
If  we  ignore  lines  3–7  of  the  procedure,  we  have  an  ordinary  algorithm  for
searching a sorted linked list, in which indexipoints to each position of the list in
1
Because we have defined a mergeable heap to support MINIMUMand EXTRACT-MIN, we can also
refer to it as amergeable min-heap. Alternatively, if it supported M
AXIMUMand EXTRACT-MAX,
it would be amergeable max-heap.

Problems for Chapter 10251
turn.  The search terminates once the indexi“falls off” the end of the list or once
keyŒi k.  In the latter case, ifkeyŒi Dk, clearly we have found a key with the
valuek.  If, however,keyŒi  > k, then we will never find a key with the valuek,
and so terminating the search was the right thing to do.
Lines 3–7 attempt to skip ahead to a randomly chosen positionj.Suchaskip
benefits us ifkeyŒj is larger thankeyŒi andnolargerthank;  in such a case,j
marks a position in the list thatiwould have to reach during an ordinary list search.
Because the list is compact, we know that any choice ofjbetween1andnindexes
some object in the list rather than a slot on the free list.
Instead of analyzing the performance of C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCHdirectly, we
shall analyze a related algorithm, C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
, which executes two
separate loops.  This algorithm takes an additional parametertwhich determines
an upper bound on the number of iterations of the first loop.
C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
.L;n;k;t/
1iDL
2forqD1tot
3jDR
ANDOM.1; n/
4ifkeyŒi  <keyŒj andkeyŒj k
5iDj
6ifkeyŒi 
==k
7returni
8whilei¤
NILandkeyŒi  < k
9iDnextŒi 
10ifi
==NILorkeyŒi  > k
11return
NIL
12else returni
To  compare  the  execution  of  the  algorithms  C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH.L;n;k/
and C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
.L;n;k;t/, assume that the sequence of integers re-
turned by the calls of R
ANDOM.1; n/is the same for both algorithms.
a.Suppose that C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH.L;n;k/takestiterations of thewhile
loop of lines 2–8.  Argue that C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
.L;n;k;t/returns the
same answer and that the total number of iterations of both theforandwhile
loops within C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
is at leastt.
In the call C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
.L;n;k;t/,letX
t
be the random variable that
describes the distance in the linked list (that is, through the chain ofnextpointers)
from positionito the desired keykaftertiterations of theforloop of lines 2–7
have occurred.

252Chapter 10Elementary Data Structures
b.Argue that the expected running time of COMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
.L;n;k;t/
isO.tCEŒX
t
/.
c.Show that EŒX
t

P
n
rD1
.1r=n/
t
.(Hint:Use equation (C.25).)
d.Show that
P
n1
rD0
r
t
n
tC1
=.tC1/.
e.Prove that EŒX
t
n=.tC1/.
f.Show that C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
.L;n;k;t/runs inO.tCn=t /expected
time.
g.Conclude that C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCHruns inO.
p
n/expected time.
h.Why do we assume that all keys are distinct in C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH?Ar-
gue that random skips do not necessarily help asymptotically when the list con-
tains repeated key values.
Chapter notes
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [6] and Knuth [209] are excellent references for ele-
mentary data structures. Many other texts cover both basic data structures and their
implementation in a particular programming language. Examples of these types of
textbooks include Goodrich and Tamassia [147], Main [241], Shaffer [311], and
Weiss [352, 353, 354].   Gonnet  [145] provides  experimental  data on the perfor-
mance of many data-structure operations.
The origin of stacks and queues as data structures  in computer  science is un-
clear, since corresponding notions already existed in mathematics and paper-based
business practices before the introduction of digital computers.  Knuth [209] cites
A. M. Turing for the development of stacks for subroutine linkage in 1947.
Pointer-based  data  structures  also  seem  to be  a  folk  invention.   According  to
Knuth, pointers were apparently used in early computers with drum memories. The
A-1 language developed by G. M. Hopper in 1951 represented algebraic formulas
as binary trees. Knuth credits the IPL-II language, developed in 1956 by A. Newell,
J. C. Shaw, and H. A. Simon, for recognizing the importance and promoting the
use of pointers. Their IPL-III language, developed in 1957, included explicit stack
operations.

11Hash Tables
Many applications require a dynamic set that supports only the dictionary opera-
tions I
NSERT,SEARCH,andDELETE.  For example, a compiler that translates a
programming language maintains a symbol table,  in which the keys of elements
are arbitrary character strings corresponding to identifiers in the language.  A hash
table is an effective data structure for implementing dictionaries. Although search-
ing for an element in a hash table can take as long as searching for an element in a
linked list—‚.n/time in the worst case—in practice, hashing performs extremely
well.  Under reasonable assumptions, the average time to search for an element in
a hash table isO.1/.
A hash table generalizes the simpler notion of an ordinary array.  Directly ad-
dressing into an ordinary array makes effective use of our ability to examine an
arbitrary position in an array inO.1/time.  Section 11.1 discusses direct address-
ing in more detail. We can take advantage of direct addressing when we can afford
to allocate an array that has one position for every possible key.
When the number of keys actually stored is small relative to the total number of
possible keys, hash tables become an effective alternative to directly addressing an
array, since a hash table typically uses an array of size proportional to the number
of keys actually stored. Instead of using the key as an array index directly, the array
index iscomputedfrom the key. Section 11.2 presents the main ideas, focusing on
“chaining” as a way to handle “collisions,” in which more than one key maps to the
same array index.  Section 11.3 describes how we can compute array indices from
keys using hash functions.  We present and analyze several variations on the basic
theme. Section 11.4 looks at “open addressing,” which is another way to deal with
collisions.  The bottom line is that hashing is an extremely effective and practical
technique:  the basic dictionary operations require onlyO.1/time on the average.
Section 11.5 explains how “perfect hashing” can support searches inO.1/worst-
casetime, when the set of keys being stored is static (that is, when the set of keys
never changes once stored).

254Chapter 11Hash Tables
11.1  Direct-address tables
Direct addressing is a simple technique that works well when the universeUof
keys is reasonably small. Suppose that an application needs a dynamic set in which
each element has a key drawn from the universeUD
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
,wherem
is not too large. We shall assume that no two elements have the same key.
To represent the dynamic set, we use an array, ordirect-address table, denoted
byTŒ0::m1, in which each position, orslot, corresponds to a key in the uni-
verseU. Figure 11.1 illustrates the approach; slotkpoints to an element in the set
with keyk. If the set contains no element with keyk,thenTŒkD
NIL.
The dictionary operations are trivial to implement:
D
IRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH.T; k/
1returnTŒk
D
IRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT.T; x/
1TŒx:keyDx
D
IRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE.T; x/
1TŒx:keyD
NIL
Each of these operations takes onlyO.1/time.
T
U
(universe of keys)
K
(actual
keys)
2
3
5
8
1
9
4
0
7
6
2
3
5
8
keysatellite data
2
0
1
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Figure 11.1How to implement a dynamic set by a direct-address tableT. Each key in the universe
UD
f
0; 1; : : : ; 9
g
corresponds  to an index in the table.   The setKD
f
2; 3; 5; 8
g
of actual keys
determines the slots in the table that contain pointers to elements.  The other slots, heavily shaded,
contain
NIL.

11.1Direct-address tables255
For some applications, the direct-address table itself can hold the elements in the
dynamic set.  That is, rather than storing an element’s key and satellite data in an
object external to the direct-address table, with a pointer from a slot in the table to
the object, we can store the object in the slot itself, thus saving space.  We would
use a special key within an object to indicate an empty slot.  Moreover, it is often
unnecessary to store the key of the object, since if we have the index of an object
in the table, we have its key.  If keys are not stored, however, we must have some
way to tell whether the slot is empty.
Exercises
11.1-1
Suppose that a dynamic setSis represented by a direct-address tableTof lengthm.
Describe a procedure that finds the maximum element ofS. What is the worst-case
performance of your procedure?
11.1-2
Abit vectoris simply an array of bits (0sand1s).  A bit vector of lengthmtakes
much less space  than  an array  ofmpointers.   Describe  how  to use a bit  vector
to represent a dynamic set of distinct elements with no satellite data.  Dictionary
operations should run inO.1/time.
11.1-3
Suggest how to implement a direct-address  table in which the keys of stored el-
ements  do not  need  to be distinct  and  the elements  can  have  satellite  data.   All
three dictionary operations (I
NSERT,DELETE,andSEARCH) should run inO.1/
time. (Don’t forget that D
ELETEtakes as an argument a pointer to an object to be
deleted, not a key.)
11.1-4?
We wish to implement a dictionary by using direct addressing on ahugearray.  At
the start,  the array entries  may contain  garbage,  and initializing  the entire  array
is impractical because of its size.  Describe a scheme for implementing a direct-
address  dictionary  on a huge  array.   Each stored  object  should  useO.1/space;
the operations  S
EARCH,INSERT,andDELETEshould takeO.1/time each;  and
initializing the data structure should takeO.1/time. (Hint:Use an additional array,
treated somewhat like a stack whose size is the number of keys actually stored in
the dictionary, to help determine whether a given entry in the huge array is valid or
not.)

256Chapter 11Hash Tables
11.2  Hash tables
The downside of direct addressing is obvious:  if the universeUis large, storing
atableTof size
j
U
j
may be impractical,  or even impossible,  given the memory
available  on a typical  computer.  Furthermore,  the setKof keysactually stored
may be so  small relative  toUthat  most  of  the  space  allocated  forTwould be
wasted.
When  the setKof keys  stored  in a dictionary  is much  smaller  than  the  uni-
verseUof all possible keys, a hash table requires much less storage than a direct-
address table. Specifically, we can reduce the storage requirement to‚.
j
K
j
/while
we maintain the benefit that searching for an element in the hash table still requires
onlyO.1/time. The catch is that this bound is for theaverage-case time, whereas
for direct addressing it holds for theworst-case time.
With direct addressing, an element with keykis stored in slotk. With hashing,
this element is stored in sloth.k/; that is, we use ahash functionhto compute the
slot from the keyk.  Here,hmaps the universeUof keys into the slots of ahash
tableTŒ0::m1:
hWU!
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
;
where the sizemof the hash table is typically much less than
j
U
j
. We say that an
element with keykhashesto sloth.k/; we also say thath.k/is thehash valueof
keyk.  Figure 11.2 illustrates the basic idea.  The hash function reduces the range
of array indices and hence the size of the array.  Instead of a size of
j
U
j
, the array
can have size
m.
T
U
(universe of keys)
K
(actual
keys)
0
m–1
k
1
k
2
k
3
k
4
k
5
h(k
1
)
h(k
4
)
h(k
3
)
h(k
2
) = h(k
5
)
Figure 11.2Using a hash functionhto map keys to hash-table slots. Because keysk
2
andk
5
map
to the same slot, they collide.

11.2Hash tables257
T
U
(universe of keys)
K
(actual
keys)
k
1
k
2
k
3
k
4
k
5
k
6
k
7
k
8
k
1
k
2
k
3
k
4
k
5
k
6
k
7
k
8
Figure 11.3Collision resolution by chaining.  Each hash-table slotTŒjcontains a linked list of
all the keys whose hash value isj.  For example,h.k
1
/Dh.k
4
/andh.k
5
/Dh.k
7
/Dh.k
2
/.
The linked list can be either singly or doubly linked; we show it as doubly linked because deletion is
faster that way.
There is one hitch:  two keys may hash to the same slot.  We call this situation
acollision.   Fortunately,  we have  effective  techniques  for  resolving  the  conflict
created by collisions.
Of course, the ideal solution would be to avoid collisions altogether.  We might
try  to achieve  this  goal  by choosing  a suitable  hash  functionh.   One idea  is  to
makehappear  to  be  “random,”  thus  avoiding  collisions  or  at  least  minimizing
their  number.   The very  term  “to  hash,”  evoking  images  of  random  mixing  and
chopping, captures the spirit of this approach. (Of course, a hash functionhmust be
deterministic in that a given inputkshould always produce the same outputh.k/.)
Because
j
U
j
>m, however, there must be at least two keys that have the same hash
value; avoiding collisions altogether is therefore impossible.  Thus, while a well-
designed, “random”-looking hash function can minimize the number of collisions,
we still need a method for resolving the collisions that do occur.
The  remainder  of  this  section  presents  the  simplest  collision  resolution  tech-
nique, called chaining. Section 11.4 introduces an alternative method for resolving
collisions, called open addressing.
Collision resolution by chaining
Inchaining,  we place  all the elements  that hash to the same slot into the same
linked list, as Figure 11.3 shows. Slotjcontains a pointer to the head of the list of
all stored elements that hash toj; if there are no such elements, slotjcontains
NIL.

258Chapter 11Hash Tables
The dictionary operations on a hash tableTare easy to implement when colli-
sions are resolved by chaining:
C
HAINED-HASH-INSERT.T; x/
1insertxat the head of listTŒh.x:key/
C
HAINED-HASH-SEARCH.T; k/
1search for an element with keykin listTŒh.k/
C
HAINED-HASH-DELETE.T; x/
1deletexfrom the listTŒh.x:key/
The worst-case running time for insertion isO.1/.  The insertion procedure is fast
in part because it assumes that the elementxbeing inserted is not already present in
the table; if necessary, we can check this assumption (at additional cost) by search-
ing for an element whose key isx:keybefore we insert.  For searching, the worst-
case running  time is proportional  to the length  of the list;  we shall  analyze  this
operation more closely below.  We can delete an element inO.1/time if the lists
are doubly linked,  as Figure 11.3 depicts.  (Note that  C
HAINED-HASH-DELETE
takes as input an elementxand not its keyk, so that we don’t have to search forx
first. If the hash table supports deletion, then its linked lists should be doubly linked
so that we can delete an item quickly.  If the lists were only singly linked, then to
delete elementx, we would first have to findxin the listTŒh.x:key/so that we
could update thenextattribute ofx’s predecessor.  With singly linked lists, both
deletion and searching would have the same asymptotic running times.)
Analysis of hashing with chaining
How well does hashing with chaining perform? In particular, how long does it take
to search for an element with a given key?
Given a hash tableTwithmslots that storesnelements,  we define theload
factor ̨forTasn=m, that is, the average number of elements stored in a chain.
Our analysis  will be in terms of ̨,  which can be less than,  equal  to,  or  greater
than1.
The worst-case behavior  of hashing  with chaining  is terrible:  allnkeys hash
to the same slot, creating a list of lengthn.  The worst-case time for searching is
thus‚.n/plus the time to compute the hash function—no better than if we used
one linked list for all the elements.  Clearly,  we do not use hash tables for their
worst-case performance. (Perfect hashing, described in Section 11.5, does provide
good worst-case performance when the set of keys is static, however.)
The average-case performance of hashing depends on how well the hash func-
tionhdistributes the set of keys to be stored among themslots, on the average.

11.2Hash tables259
Section 11.3 discusses these issues,  but for now we shall assume that any given
element is equally likely to hash into any of themslots, independently of where
any other element has hashed to.  We call this the assumption ofsimple uniform
hashing.
ForjD0; 1; : : : ; m1, let us denote the length of the listTŒjbyn
j
,sothat
nDn
0
Cn
1
CCn
m1
;(11.1)
and the expected value ofn
j
is EŒn
j
D ̨Dn=m.
We  assume  thatO.1/time  suffices  to  compute  the  hash  valueh.k/,sothat
the  time  required  to  search  for  an  element  with  keykdepends  linearly  on  the
lengthn
h.k/
of the listTŒh.k/.  Setting aside theO.1/time required to compute
the hash function and to access sloth.k/, let us consider the expected number of
elements examined by the search algorithm, that is, the number of elements in the
listTŒh.k/that the algorithm checks to see whether any have a key equal tok.We
shall consider two cases.  In the first, the search is unsuccessful:  no element in the
table has keyk. In the second, the search successfully finds an element with keyk.
Theorem 11.1
In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining, an unsuccessful search
takes average-case time‚.1C ̨/, under the assumption of simple uniform hashing.
ProofUnder the assumption of simple uniform hashing, any keyknot already
stored in the table is equally likely to hash to any of themslots. The expected time
to search unsuccessfully  for a keykis the expected time to search to the end of
listTŒh.k/, which has expected length EŒn
h.k/
D ̨. Thus, the expected number
of elements examined in an unsuccessful search is ̨, and the total time required
(including the time for computingh.k/)is‚.1C ̨/.
The situation for a successful search is slightly different,  since each list is not
equally likely to be searched.  Instead, the probability that a list is searched is pro-
portional to the number of elements it contains.  Nonetheless, the expected search
time still turns out to be‚.1C ̨/.
Theorem 11.2
In a hash table in which collisions are resolved by chaining,  a successful  search
takes average-case time‚.1C ̨/, under the assumption of simple uniform hashing.
ProofWe assume that the element being searched for is equally likely to be any
of thenelements stored in the table.  The number of elements examined during a
successful search for an elementxis one more than the number of elements that

260Chapter 11Hash Tables
appear beforexinx’s list.  Because new elements are placed at the front of the
list,  elements beforexin the list were all inserted afterxwas inserted.  To find
the expected number of elements examined, we take the average, over thenele-
mentsxin the table, of1plus the expected number of elements added tox’s list
afterxwas added to the list.  Letx
i
denote theith element inserted into the ta-
ble, foriD1;2;:::;n,andletk
i
Dx
i
:key.  For keysk
i
andk
j
,wedefinethe
indicator random variableX
ij
DI
f
h.k
i
/Dh.k
j
/
g
. Under the assumption of sim-
ple uniform hashing, we have Pr
f
h.k
i
/Dh.k
j
/
g
D1=m, and so by Lemma 5.1,
EŒX
ij
D1=m.  Thus, the expected number of elements examined in a successful
search is
E
"
1
n
n
X
iD1
 
1C
n
X
jDiC1
X
ij
!#
D
1
n
n
X
iD1
 
1C
n
X
jDiC1
EŒX
ij

!
(by linearity of expectation)
D
1
n
n
X
iD1
 
1C
n
X
jDiC1
1
m
!
D1C
1
nm
n
X
iD1
.ni/
D1C
1
nm
 
n
X
iD1
n
n
X
iD1
i
!
D1C
1
nm

n
2

n.nC1/
2

(by equation (A.1))
D1C
n1
2m
D1C
 ̨
2

 ̨
2n
:
Thus, the total time required for a successful search (including the time for com-
puting the hash function) is‚.2C ̨=2 ̨=2n/D‚.1C ̨/.
What does this analysis mean?  If the number of hash-table slots is at least pro-
portional  to the number of elements in the table,  we havenDO.m/and,  con-
sequently, ̨Dn=mDO.m/=mDO.1/.  Thus, searching takes constant time
on average.  Since insertion takesO.1/worst-case time and deletion takesO.1/
worst-case  time when  the  lists  are  doubly  linked,  we can  support  all  dictionary
operations inO.1/time on average.

11.2Hash tables261
Exercises
11.2-1
Suppose  we  use  a  hash  functionhto  hashndistinct  keys  into  an  arrayTof
lengthm.   Assuming  simple  uniform  hashing,  what  is  the  expected  number  of
collisions?  More precisely, what is the expected cardinality of
ff
k; l
g
Wk¤land
h.k/Dh.l /
g
?
11.2-2
Demonstrate what happens when we insert the keys5; 28; 19; 15; 20; 33; 12; 17; 10
into a hash table with collisions resolved by chaining.  Let the table have9slots,
and let the hash function beh.k/Dkmod9.
11.2-3
Professor Marley hypothesizes that he can obtain substantial performance gains by
modifying the chaining scheme to keep each list in sorted order. How does the pro-
fessor’s modification affect the running time for successful searches, unsuccessful
searches, insertions, and deletions?
11.2-4
Suggest how to allocate and deallocate storage for elements within the hash table
itself by linking all unused slots into a free list.  Assume that one slot can store
a flag and either one element plus a pointer  or two pointers.   All dictionary  and
free-list operations should run inO.1/expected time. Does the free list need to be
doubly linked, or does a singly linked free list suffice?
11.2-5
Suppose that we are storing a set ofnkeys into a hash table of sizem. Show that if
the keys are drawn from a universeUwith
j
U
j
>nm,thenUhas a subset of sizen
consisting of keys that all hash to the same slot, so that the worst-case searching
time for hashing with chaining is‚.n/.
11.2-6
Suppose we have storednkeys in a hash table of sizem, with collisions resolved by
chaining, and that we know the length of each chain, including the lengthLof the
longest chain.  Describe a procedure that selects a key uniformly at random from
among the keys in the hash table and returns it in expected timeO.L.1C1= ̨//.

262Chapter 11Hash Tables
11.3  Hash functions
In this section, we discuss some issues regarding the design of good hash functions
and then present three schemes for their creation. Two of the schemes, hashing by
division and hashing by multiplication,  are heuristic in nature,  whereas the third
scheme,  universal hashing,  uses randomization to provide provably good perfor-
mance.
What makes a good hash function?
A good hash function satisfies (approximately) the assumption of simple uniform
hashing:  each key is equally likely to hash to any of themslots, independently of
where any other key has hashed to.  Unfortunately,  we typically have no way to
check this condition, since we rarely know the probability distribution from which
the keys are drawn. Moreover, the keys might not be drawn independently.
Occasionally  we do know the distribution.   For example,  if we know that  the
keys are random  real  numberskindependently  and uniformly  distributed  in the
range0k<1, then the hash function
h.k/D
b
km
c
satisfies the condition of simple uniform hashing.
In practice, we can often employ heuristic techniques to create a hash function
that performs well.  Qualitative information about the distribution of keys may be
useful in this design process.  For example, consider a compiler’s symbol table, in
which the keys are character strings representing identifiers in a program. Closely
related symbols, such asptandpts, often occur in the same program.  A good
hash function would minimize the chance that such variants hash to the same slot.
A good approach derives the hash value in a way that we expect to be indepen-
dent of any patterns that might exist in the data. For example, the “division method”
(discussed in Section 11.3.1) computes the hash value as the remainder when the
key is divided by a specified prime number.  This method frequently gives good
results, assuming that we choose a prime number that is unrelated to any patterns
in the distribution of keys.
Finally, we note that some applications of hash functions might require stronger
properties than are provided by simple uniform hashing.  For example, we might
want keys that are “close” in some sense to yield hash values that are far apart.
(This property is especially desirable when we are using linear probing, defined in
Section 11.4.)  Universal hashing, described in Section 11.3.3, often provides the
desired properties.

11.3Hash functions263
Interpreting keys as natural numbers
Most hash functions assume that the universe of keys is the setND
f
0; 1; 2; : : :
g
of natural numbers.  Thus, if the keys are not natural numbers, we find a way to
interpret them as natural numbers. For example, we can interpret a character string
as an integer  expressed  in suitable  radix  notation.   Thus,  we might  interpret  the
identifierptas the pair of decimal integers.112; 116/,sincepD112andtD116
in the  ASCII character  set;  then,  expressed  as a radix-128  integer,ptbecomes
.112128/C116D14452.  In the context of a given application, we can usually
devise some such method for interpreting  each key as a (possibly  large)  natural
number. In what follows, we assume that the keys are natural numbers.
11.3.1  The division method
In thedivision methodfor creating hash functions, we map a keykinto one ofm
slots by taking the remainder ofkdivided bym. That is, the hash function is
h.k/Dkmodm:
For example,  if the hash  table  has sizemD12and  the key iskD100,then
h.k/D4. Since it requires only a single division operation, hashing by division is
quite fast.
When  using  the  division  method,  we  usually  avoid  certain  values  ofm.For
example,mshould not be a power of2, since ifmD2
p
,thenh.k/is just thep
lowest-order bits ofk. Unless we know that all low-orderp-bit patterns are equally
likely, we are better off designing the hash function to depend on all the bits of the
key.   As Exercise 11.3-3  asks you to show,  choosingmD2
p
1whenkis a
character string interpreted in radix2
p
may be a poor choice, because permuting
the characters ofkdoes not change its hash value.
A prime not too close to an exact power of 2 is often a good choice form.For
example,  suppose  we  wish  to  allocate  a  hash  table,  with  collisions  resolved  by
chaining, to hold roughlynD2000character strings, where a character has8bits.
We don’t mind examining an average of3elements in an unsuccessful search, and
so we allocate a hash table of sizemD701.  We could choosemD701because
it is a prime near2000=3but not near any power of 2.  Treating each keykas an
integer, our hash function would be
h.k/Dkmod701 :
11.3.2  The multiplication method
Themultiplication methodfor creating hash functions operates in two steps. First,
we multiply the keykby a constantAin the range0<A<1and extract the

264Chapter 11Hash Tables
×
sDA2
w
wbits
k
r
0
r
1
h.k/
extractpbits
Figure 11.4The multiplication method of hashing. Thew-bit representation of the keykis multi-
plied by thew-bit valuesDA2
w
.Thephighest-order bits of the lowerw-bit half of the product
form the desired hash valueh.k/.
fractional part ofkA.  Then, we multiply this value bymand take the floor of the
result. In short, the hash function is
h.k/D
b
m.kAmod1/
c
;
where “kAmod1” means the fractional part ofkA,thatis,kA
b
kA
c
.
An advantage of the multiplication method is that the value ofmis not critical.
We typically choose it to be a power of2(mD2
p
for some integerp), since we
can then easily implement the function on most computers as follows.  Suppose
that the word size of the machine iswbits and thatkfits into a single word.  We
restrictAto be  a fraction  of the forms=2
w
,wheresis an integer  in the range
0<s<2
w
.  Referring to Figure 11.4, we first multiplykby thew-bit integer
sDA2
w
. The result is a2w-bit valuer
1
2
w
Cr
0
,wherer
1
is the high-order word
of the product andr
0
is the low-order word of the product. The desiredp-bit hash
value consists of thepmost significant bits ofr
0
.
Although this method works with any value of the constantA, it works better
with some values than with others.  The optimal choice depends on the character-
istics of the data being hashed. Knuth [211] suggests that
A.
p
51/=2D0:6180339887 : : :(11.2)
is likely to work reasonably well.
As an example, suppose we havekD123456,pD14,mD2
14
D16384,
andwD32.  Adapting Knuth’s suggestion, we chooseAto be the fraction of the
forms=2
32
that is closest to.
p
51/=2,sothatAD2654435769=2
32
.Then
ksD327706022297664D.763002
32
/C17612864,andsor
1
D76300
andr
0
D17612864.The14most significant bits ofr
0
yield the valueh.k/D67.

11.3Hash functions265
?11.3.3  Universal hashing
If a malicious adversary chooses the keys to be hashed by some fixed hash function,
then the adversary can choosenkeys that all hash to the same slot, yielding an av-
erage retrieval time of‚.n/. Any fixed hash function is vulnerable to such terrible
worst-case behavior;  the only effective way to improve the situation is to choose
the hash functionrandomlyin a way that isindependentof the keys that are actually
going to be stored.  This approach,  calleduniversal hashing, can yield provably
good performance on average, no matter which keys the adversary chooses.
In universal hashing, at the beginning of execution we select the hash function
at random from a carefully designed class of functions.  As in the case of quick-
sort, randomization guarantees that no single input will always evoke worst-case
behavior.   Because we randomly  select  the hash function,  the algorithm  can be-
have  differently  on each  execution,  even  for  the  same  input,  guaranteeing  good
average-case performance for any input. Returning to the example of a compiler’s
symbol table, we find that the programmer’s choice of identifiers cannot now cause
consistently poor hashing performance.  Poor performance occurs only when the
compiler chooses a random hash function that causes the set of identifiers to hash
poorly, but the probability of this situation occurring is small and is the same for
any set of identifiers of the same size.
LetHbe a finite collection of hash functions that map a given universeUof
keys into  the range
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
.   Such a collection  is said to beuniversal
if for each pair of distinct keysk; l2U, the number of hash functionsh2H
for whichh.k/Dh.l /is at most
j
H
j
=m.  In other words, with a hash function
randomly chosen fromH, the chance of a collision between distinct keyskandl
is no more than the chance1=mof a collision ifh.k/andh.l /were randomly and
independently chosen from the set
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
.
The following theorem shows that a universal class of hash functions gives good
average-case behavior. Recall thatn
i
denotes the length of listTŒi.
Theorem 11.3
Suppose that a hash functionhis chosen randomly from a universal collection of
hash  functions  and  has  been  used  to  hashnkeys  into  a  tableTof  sizem,us-
ing chaining to resolve collisions.  If keykis not in the table, then the expected
length EŒn
h.k/
of the list that keykhashes to is at most the load factor ̨Dn=m.
If keykis in the table, then the expected length EŒn
h.k/
of the list containing keyk
is at most1C ̨.
ProofWe note that the expectations here are over the choice of the hash func-
tion  and  do  not  depend  on  any  assumptions  about  the  distribution  of  the  keys.
For  each  pairkandlof  distinct  keys,  define  the  indicator  random  variable

266Chapter 11Hash Tables
X
kl
DI
f
h.k/Dh.l /
g
.  Since by the definition of a universal  collection  of hash
functions,  a single  pair  of keys collides  with probability  at most1=m,wehave
Pr
f
h.k/Dh.l /
g
1=m. By Lemma 5.1, therefore, we have EŒX
kl
1=m.
Next we define, for each keyk, the random variableY
k
that equals the number
of keys other thankthat hash to the same slot ask,sothat
Y
k
D
X
l2T
l¤k
X
kl
:
Thus we have
EŒY
k
DE
2
4
X
l2T
l¤k
X
kl
3
5
D
X
l2T
l¤k
EŒX
kl
(by linearity of expectation)

X
l2T
l¤k
1
m
:
The remainder of the proof depends on whether keykis in tableT.

Ifk62T,thenn
h.k/
DY
k
and
jf
lWl2Tandl¤k
gj
Dn.  Thus EŒn
h.k/
D
EŒY
k
n=mD ̨.

Ifk2T, then because keykappears in listTŒh.k/and the countY
k
does not
include keyk,wehaven
h.k/
DY
k
C1and
jf
lWl2Tandl¤k
gj
Dn1.
Thus EŒn
h.k/
DEŒY
k
C1.n1/=mC1D1C ̨1=m < 1C ̨.
The following corollary says universal hashing provides the desired payoff:  it
has now become impossible for an adversary to pick a sequence of operations that
forces the worst-case running time.  By cleverly randomizing the choice of hash
function at run time, we guarantee that we can process every sequence of operations
with a good average-case running time.
Corollary 11.4
Using universal hashing and collision resolution by chaining in an initially empty
table withmslots, it takes expected time‚.n/to handle any sequence ofnI
NSERT,
S
EARCH,andDELETEoperations containingO.m/INSERToperations.
ProofSince  the  number  of  insertions  isO.m/,wehavenDO.m/and  so
 ̨DO.1/.TheI
NSERTand DELETEoperations take constant time and, by The-
orem 11.3, the expected time for each S
EARCHoperation isO.1/.  By linearity of

11.3Hash functions267
expectation,  therefore,  the expected time for the entire sequence ofnoperations
isO.n/. Since each operation takes.1/time, the‚.n/bound follows.
Designing a universal class of hash functions
It  is  quite  easy  to design  a  universal  class  of  hash  functions,  as  a little  number
theory  will help  us prove.   You may wish to consult  Chapter  31 first  if you  are
unfamiliar with number theory.
We begin by choosing  a prime numberplarge enough so that every possible
keykis in the range0top1, inclusive. LetZ
p
denote the set
f
0; 1; : : : ; p1
g
,
and letZ

p
denote the set
f
1;2;:::;p1
g
.Sincepis prime, we can solve equa-
tions modulopwith the methods given in Chapter 31. Because we assume that the
size of the universe of keys is greater than the number of slots in the hash table, we
havep>m.
We now define the hash functionh
ab
for anya2Z

p
and anyb2Z
p
using a
linear transformation followed by reductions modulopand then modulom:
h
ab
.k/D..akCb/modp/modm:(11.3)
For example, withpD17andmD6,wehaveh
3;4
.8/D5.  The family of all
such hash functions is
H
pm
D
 ̊
h
ab
Wa2Z

p
andb2Z
p


:(11.4)
Each hash functionh
ab
mapsZ
p
toZ
m
.  This class of hash functions has the nice
property that the sizemof the output range is arbitrary—not necessarily prime—a
feature which we shall use in Section 11.5.  Since we havep1choices fora
andpchoices forb, the collectionH
pm
containsp.p1/hash functions.
Theorem 11.5
The classH
pm
of hash functions defined by equations (11.3) and (11.4) is universal.
ProofConsider two distinct keyskandlfromZ
p
,sothatk¤l.Foragiven
hash functionh
ab
we let
rD.akCb/modp;
sD.alCb/modp:
We first note thatr¤s. Why? Observe that
rsa.kl/  .modp/ :
It  follows  thatr¤sbecausepis  prime  and  bothaand.kl/are  nonzero
modulop, and so their product must also be nonzero modulopby Theorem 31.6.
Therefore, when computing anyh
ab
2H
pm
, distinct inputskandlmap to distinct

268Chapter 11Hash Tables
valuesrandsmodulop; there are no collisions yet at the “modplevel.” Moreover,
each of the possiblep.p1/choices for the pair.a; b/witha¤0yields adifferent
resulting pair.r; s/withr¤s, since we can solve foraandbgivenrands:
aD

.rs/..kl/
1
modp/

modp;
bD.rak/modp;
where..kl/
1
modp/denotes  the  unique  multiplicative  inverse,  modulop,
ofkl.  Since there are onlyp.p1/possible pairs.r; s/withr¤s,there
is a one-to-one correspondence  between pairs.a; b/witha¤0and pairs.r; s/
withr¤s. Thus, for any given pair of inputskandl,ifwepick.a; b/uniformly
at random fromZ

p
	Z
p
, the resulting pair.r; s/is equally likely to be any pair of
distinct values modulop.
Therefore, the probability that distinct keyskandlcollide is equal to the prob-
ability thatrs.modm/whenrandsare randomly chosen as distinct values
modulop.Foragivenvalueofr,ofthep1possible remaining values fors,the
number of valuesssuch thats¤randsr.modm/is at most
d
p=m
e
1..pCm1/=m/1(by inequality (3.6))
D.p1/=m :
The  probability  thatscollides  withrwhen  reduced  modulomis  at  most
..p1/=m/=.p1/D1=m.
Therefore, for any pair of distinct valuesk; l2Z
p
,
Pr
f
h
ab
.k/Dh
ab
.l /
g
1=m ;
so thatH
pm
is indeed universal.
Exercises
11.3-1
Suppose we wish to search a linked list of lengthn, where each element contains
akeykalong with a hash valueh.k/.  Each key is a long character string.  How
might we take advantage of the hash values when searching the list for an element
with a given key?
11.3-2
Suppose  that  we  hash  a  string  ofrcharacters  intomslots  by  treating  it  as  a
radix-128  number  and then using  the division  method.   We can easily  represent
the numbermas a 32-bit computer word, but the string ofrcharacters, treated as
a radix-128 number, takes many words. How can we apply the division method to
compute the hash value of the character string without using more than a constant
number of words of storag
e
outside the string itself?

11.4Open addressing269
11.3-3
Consider  a  version  of  the  division  method  in  whichh.k/Dkmodm,where
mD2
p
1andkis a character string interpreted  in radix2
p
.  Show that if we
can derive stringxfrom stringyby permuting its characters, thenxandyhash to
the same value. Give an example of an application in which this property would be
undesirable in a hash function.
11.3-4
Consider a hash table of sizemD1000and a corresponding hash functionh.k/D
b
m.kAmod1/
c
forAD.
p
51/=2.  Compute the locations to which the keys
61,62,63,64,and65are mapped.
11.3-5?
DefineafamilyHof hash functions  from  a finite setUto a finite setBto be
-universalif for all pairs of distinct elementskandlinU,
Pr
f
h.k/Dh.l /
g
;
where the probability is over the choice of the hash functionhdrawn at random
from the familyH. Show that an-universal family of hash functions must have

1
j
B
j

1
j
U
j
:
11.3-6?
LetUbe the set ofn-tuples of values drawn fromZ
p
,andletBDZ
p
,wherep
is prime.  Define the hash functionh
b
WU!Bforb2Z
p
on an inputn-tuple
ha
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
ifromUas
h
b
.ha
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
i/D
 
n1
X
jD0
a
j
b
j
!
modp;
and letHD
f
h
b
Wb2Z
p
g
.  Argue thatHis..n1/=p/-universal according to
the definition of-universal in Exercise 11.3-5. (Hint:See Exercise 31.4-4.)
11.4  Open addressing
Inopen addressing, all elements occupy the hash table itself.  That is, each table
entry contains either an element of the dynamic set or
NIL.  When searching for
an element, we systematically examine table slots until either we find the desired
element or we have ascertained that the element is not in the table.  No lists and

270Chapter 11Hash Tables
no  elements  are  stored  outside  the table,  unlike  in chaining.   Thus,  in open  ad-
dressing, the hash table can “fill up” so that no further insertions can be made; one
consequence is that the load factor ̨can never exceed1.
Of course, we could store the linked lists for chaining inside the hash table, in
the otherwise unused hash-table slots (see Exercise 11.2-4), but the advantage of
open addressing is that it avoids pointers altogether. Instead of following pointers,
wecomputethe sequence of slots to be examined. The extra memory freed by not
storing pointers provides the hash table with a larger number of slots for the same
amount of memory, potentially yielding fewer collisions and faster retrieval.
To perform insertion using open addressing, we successively examine, orprobe,
the hash table until we find an empty slot in which to put the key. Instead of being
fixed in the order0; 1; : : : ; m1(which requires‚.n/search time), the sequence
of positions probeddepends upon the key being inserted. To determine which slots
to probe, we extend the hash function to include the probe number (starting from0)
as a second input. Thus, the hash function becomes
hWU	
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
!
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
:
With open addressing, we require that for every keyk,theprobe sequence
hh.k;0/;h.k;1/;:::;h.k;m1/i
be a permutation ofh0; 1; : : : ; m1i, so that every hash-table position is eventually
considered as a slot for a new key as the table fills up. In the following pseudocode,
we assume that the elements in the hash tableTare keys with no satellite infor-
mation; the keykis identical to the element containing keyk.  Each slot contains
either a key or
NIL(if the slot is empty).  The HASH-INSERTprocedure takes as
input a hash tableTand a keyk.  It either returns the slot number where it stores
keykor flags an error because the hash table is already full.
H
ASH-INSERT.T; k/
1iD0
2repeat
3jDh.k; i /
4ifTŒj
==NIL
5TŒjDk
6returnj
7elseiDiC1
8untili
==m
9error“hash table overflow”
The algorithm for searching for keykprobes the same sequence of slots that the
insertion algorithm examined when keykwas inserted.  Therefore, the search can

11.4Open addressing271
terminate (unsuccessfully)  when it finds an empty slot, sincekwould have been
inserted there and not later in its probe sequence. (This argument assumes that keys
are not deleted from the hash table.) The procedure H
ASH-SEARCHtakes as input
a hash tableTand a keyk, returningjif it finds that slotjcontains keyk,or
NIL
if keykis not present in tableT.
H
ASH-SEARCH.T; k/
1iD0
2repeat
3jDh.k; i /
4ifTŒj
==k
5returnj
6iDiC1
7untilTŒj
==NILori==m
8return
NIL
Deletion  from an open-address  hash table  is difficult.   When we delete  a key
from  sloti,  we  cannot  simply  mark  that  slot  as  empty  by  storing
NILin  it.   If
we did, we might be unable to retrieve any keykduring whose insertion we had
probed slotiand found it occupied.  We can solve this problem by marking the
slot, storing in it the special value
DELETEDinstead ofNIL. We would then modify
the procedure H
ASH-INSERTto treat such a slot as if it were empty so that we can
insert a new key there. We do not need to modify H
ASH-SEARCH, since it will pass
over
DELETEDvalues while searching.  When we use the special valueDELETED,
however, search times no longer depend on the load factor ̨, and for this reason
chaining is more commonly selected as a collision resolution technique when keys
must be deleted.
In our analysis, we assumeuniform hashing:  the probe sequence of each key
is  equally  likely  to  be  any  of  themŠpermutations  ofh0; 1; :::; m1i.Uni-
form hashing generalizes the notion of simple uniform hashing defined earlier to a
hash function that produces not just a single number, but a whole probe sequence.
True uniform hashing is difficult to implement, however, and in practice suitable
approximations (such as double hashing, defined below) are used.
We  will  examine  three  commonly  used  techniques  to  compute  the  probe  se-
quences required for open addressing:  linear probing, quadratic probing, and dou-
ble hashing. These techniques all guarantee thathh.k;0/;h.k;1/;:::;h.k;m1/i
is a permutation ofh0;1;:::;m1ifor each keyk. None of these techniques ful-
fills the assumption of uniform hashing, however, since none of them is capable of
generating more thanm
2
different probe sequences (instead of themŠthat uniform
hashing requires). Double hashing has the greatest number of probe sequences and,
as one might expect, seems to give the best results.

272Chapter 11Hash Tables
Linear probing
Given an ordinary hash functionh
0
WU!
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
, which we refer to as
anauxiliary hash function, the method oflinear probinguses the hash function
h.k; i /D.h
0
.k/Ci/modm
foriD0; 1; : : : ; m1.Givenkeyk, we first probeTŒh
0
.k/, i.e., the slot given
by the auxiliary hash function.  We next probe slotTŒh
0
.k/C1, and so on up to
slotTŒm1. Then we wrap around to slotsT Œ0; T Œ1; : : :until we finally probe
slotTŒh
0
.k/1.  Because the initial probe determines the entire probe sequence,
there are onlymdistinct probe sequences.
Linear  probing  is easy to implement,  but  it suffers from a problem  known as
primary clustering.  Long runs of occupied slots build up, increasing the average
search time. Clusters arise because an empty slot preceded byifull slots gets filled
next with probability.iC1/=m.  Long runs of occupied slots tend to get longer,
and the average search time increases.
Quadratic probing
Quadratic probinguses a hash function of the form
h.k; i /D.h
0
.k/Cc
1
iCc
2
i
2
/modm;(11.5)
whereh
0
is an auxiliary hash function,c
1
andc
2
are positive auxiliary constants,
andiD0; 1; : : : ; m1.  The initial position probed isTŒh
0
.k/; later positions
probed are offset by amounts that depend in a quadratic manner on the probe num-
beri. This method works much better than linear probing, but to make full use of
the hash table, the values ofc
1
,c
2
,andmare constrained.  Problem 11-3 shows
one way to select these parameters.  Also, if two keys have the same initial probe
position,  then their probe sequences are the same, sinceh.k
1
;0/Dh.k
2
;0/im-
pliesh.k
1
;i/Dh.k
2
;i/. This property leads to a milder form of clustering, called
secondary clustering.  As in linear probing, the initial probe determines the entire
sequence, and so onlymdistinct probe sequences are used.
Double hashing
Double hashing offers one of the best methods available for open addressing be-
cause  the  permutations  produced  have  many  of  the  characteristics  of  randomly
chosen permutations.Double hashinguses a hash function of the form
h.k; i /D.h
1
.k/Cih
2
.k//modm;
where bothh
1
andh
2
are auxiliary hash functions.  The initial probe goes to posi-
tionTŒh
1
.k/; successive probe positions are offset from previous positions by the

11.4Open addressing273
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
79
69
98
72
14
50
Figure 11.5Insertion by double  hashing.   Here  we have a  hash table of  size13withh
1
.k/D
kmod13andh
2
.k/D1C.kmod11/.Since141.mod13/and143.mod11/,weinsert
the key14into empty slot9, after examining slots1and5and finding them to be occupied.
amounth
2
.k/, modulom. Thus, unlike the case of linear or quadratic probing, the
probe sequence here depends in two ways upon the keyk, since the initial probe
position, the offset, or both, may vary.  Figure 11.5 gives an example of insertion
by double hashing.
The valueh
2
.k/must be relatively prime to the hash-table sizemfor the entire
hash table to be searched.  (See Exercise 11.4-4.)  A convenient way to ensure this
condition is to letmbe a power of2and to designh
2
so that it always produces an
odd number.  Another way is to letmbe prime and to designh
2
so that it always
returns a positive integer less thanm. For example, we could choosemprime and
let
h
1
.k/Dkmodm;
h
2
.k/D1C.kmodm
0
/;
wherem
0
is  chosen  to  be  slightly  less  thanm(say,m1).   For  example,  if
kD123456,mD701,andm
0
D700,wehaveh
1
.k/D80andh
2
.k/D257,so
that we first probe position80, and then we examine every257th slot (modulom)
until we find the key or have examined every slot.
Whenmis prime or a power of2, double hashing improves over linear or qua-
dratic probing in that‚.m
2
/probe sequences are used,  rather than‚.m/,since
each possible.h
1
.k/; h
2
.k//pair yields a distinct probe sequence.  As a result, for

274Chapter 11Hash Tables
such values ofm, the performance of double hashing appears to be very close to
the performance of the “ideal” scheme of uniform hashing.
Although  values ofmother than primes or powers of2could in principle  be
used with double hashing, in practice it becomes more difficult to efficiently gen-
erateh
2
.k/in a way that ensures that it is relatively prime tom, in part because the
relative density.m/=mof such numbers may be small (see equation (31.24)).
Analysis of open-address hashing
As in our analysis of chaining, we express our analysis of open addressing in terms
of the load factor ̨Dn=mof the hash table.  Of course, with open addressing, at
most one element occupies each slot, and thusnm, which implies ̨1.
We assume that  we are using  uniform  hashing.   In this idealized  scheme,  the
probe  sequencehh.k; 0/; h.k; 1/; : : : ; h.k; m1/iused to insert or search  for
each keykis equally likely to be any permutation ofh0; 1; : : : ; m1i. Of course,
a given key has a unique fixed probe sequence associated with it; what we mean
here is that, considering the probability distribution on the space of keys and the
operation of the hash function on the keys, each possible probe sequence is equally
likely.
We now analyze the expected number of probes for hashing with open address-
ing under the assumption  of uniform hashing,  beginning with an analysis of the
number of probes made in an unsuccessful search.
Theorem 11.6
Given an open-address hash table with load factor ̨Dn=m  <  1, the expected
number of probes in an unsuccessful search is at most1=.1 ̨/, assuming uniform
hashing.
ProofIn an unsuccessful  search, every probe but the last accesses an occupied
slot that does not contain the desired key, and the last slot probed is empty. Let us
define the random variableXto be the number of probes made in an unsuccessful
search, and let us also define the eventA
i
,foriD1;2;:::, to be the event that
anith probe occurs and it is to an occupied slot.  Then the event
f
Xi
g
is the
intersection of eventsA
1
\A
2
\\A
i1
. We will bound Pr
f
Xi
g
by bounding
Pr
f
A
1
\A
2
\\A
i1
g
. By Exercise C.2-5,
Pr
f
A
1
\A
2
\\A
i1
g
DPr
f
A
1
g
Pr
f
A
2
jA
1
g
Pr
f
A
3
jA
1
\A
2
g

Pr
f
A
i1
jA
1
\A
2
\\A
i2
g
:
Since there arenelements andmslots, Pr
f
A
1
g
Dn=m.Forj>1, the probability
that there is ajth probe and it is to an occupied  slot,  given that the firstj1
probes were to occupied slots, is.njC1/=.mjC1/. This probability follows

11.4Open addressing275
because we would be finding one of the remaining.n.j1//elements in one
of the.m.j1//unexamined slots, and by the assumption of uniform hashing,
the probability is the ratio of these quantities.  Observing thatn<mimplies that
.nj/=.mj/n=mfor alljsuch that0j<m,wehaveforallisuch that
1im,
Pr
f
Xi
g
D
n
m

n1
m1

n2
m2

niC2
miC2


n
m

i1
D ̨
i1
:
Now, we use equation (C.25) to bound the expected number of probes:
EŒX D
1
X
iD1
Pr
f
Xi
g

1
X
iD1
 ̨
i1
D
1
X
iD0
 ̨
i
D
1
1 ̨
:
This bound of1=.1 ̨/D1C ̨C ̨
2
C ̨
3
Chas an intuitive interpretation.
We always make the first probe.  With probability approximately ̨, the first probe
finds an occupied slot, so that we need to probe a second time.  With probability
approximately ̨
2
, the first two slots are occupied so that we make a third probe,
and so on.
If ̨is a constant, Theorem 11.6 predicts that an unsuccessful search runs inO.1/
time. For example, if the hash table is half full, the average number of probes in an
unsuccessful search is at most1=.1:5/D2.Ifitis90percent full, the average
number of probes is at most1=.1:9/D10.
Theorem 11.6 gives us the performance of the H
ASH-INSERTprocedure almost
immediately.
Corollary 11.7
Inserting an element into an open-address hash table with load factor ̨requires at
most1=.1 ̨/probes on average, assuming uniform hashing.

276Chapter 11Hash Tables
ProofAn element is inserted only if there is room in the table, and thus ̨<1.
Inserting a key requires an unsuccessful search followed by placing the key into the
first empty slot found. Thus, the expected number of probes is at most1=.1 ̨/.
We have to do a little more work to compute the expected number of probes for
a successful search.
Theorem 11.8
Given an open-address hash table with load factor ̨<1, the expected number of
probes in a successful search is at most
1
 ̨
ln
1
1 ̨
;
assuming uniform hashing and assuming that each key in the table is equally likely
to be searched for.
ProofA  search  for a  keykreproduces  the same  probe  sequence  as when  the
element with keykwas inserted.  By Corollary 11.7, ifkwas the.iC1/st key
inserted into the hash table, the expected number of probes made in a search fork
is at most1=.1i=m/Dm=.mi/. Averaging over allnkeys in the hash table
gives us the expected number of probes in a successful search:
1
n
n1
X
iD0
m
mi
D
m
n
n1
X
iD0
1
mi
D
1
 ̨
m
X
kDmnC1
1
k

1
 ̨
Z
m
mn
.1=x/ dx(by inequality (A.12))
D
1
 ̨
ln
m
mn
D
1
 ̨
ln
1
1 ̨
:
If the hash table is half full, the expected number of probes in a successful search
is less than1:387. If the hash table is90percent full, the expected number of probes
is less than2:559.

11.5Perfect hashing277
Exercises
11.4-1
Consider  inserting  the  keys10; 22; 31; 4; 15; 28; 17; 88; 59into  a  hash  table  of
lengthmD11using open addressing with the auxiliary hash functionh
0
.k/Dk.
Illustrate  the result  of  inserting  these keys using  linear  probing,  using  quadratic
probing withc
1
D1andc
2
D3, and using double hashing withh
1
.k/Dkand
h
2
.k/D1C.kmod.m1//.
11.4-2
Write pseudocode for H
ASH-DELETEas outlined in the text, and modify HASH-
I
NSERTto handle the special valueDELETED.
11.4-3
Consider  an open-address  hash table with uniform  hashing.   Give upper  bounds
on the expected number of probes in an unsuccessful search and on the expected
number of probes in a successful search when the load factor is3=4and when it
is7=8.
11.4-4?
Suppose that we use double hashing to resolve collisions—that is, we use the hash
functionh.k; i /D.h
1
.k/Cih
2
.k//modm.   Show  that  ifmandh
2
.k/have
greatest common divisord1for some keyk, then an unsuccessful search for
keykexamines.1=d /th of the hash table before returning  to sloth
1
.k/.  Thus,
whendD1,sothatmandh
2
.k/are relatively prime, the search may examine the
entire hash table. (Hint:See Chapter 31.)
11.4-5?
Consider an open-address hash table with a load factor ̨. Find the nonzero value ̨
for which the expected number of probes in an unsuccessful  search equals twice
the expected number of probes in a successful search. Use the upper bounds given
by Theorems 11.6 and 11.8 for these expected numbers of probes.
?11.5  Perfect hashing
Although  hashing  is  often  a  good  choice  for  its  excellent  average-case  perfor-
mance, hashing can also provide excellentworst-caseperformance when the set of
keys isstatic:  once the keys are stored in the table, the set of keys never changes.
Some applications naturally have static sets of keys:  consider the set of reserved
words in a programming  language,  or the set of file names on a CD-ROM.  We

278Chapter 11Hash Tables
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
10010
910186075
0123
10070
0
0
16  23  884037
012345678
52
m
2
S
2
a
2
b
2
m
0
S
0
a
0
b
0
m
5
S
5
a
5
b
5
m
7
S
7
a
7
b
7
T
45678
72
9 101112131415
22
Figure 11.6Using perfect hashing to store the setKD
f
10; 22; 37; 40; 52; 60; 70; 72; 75
g
.The
outer hash function ish.k/D..akCb/modp/modm,whereaD3,bD42,pD101,and
mD9.  For example,h.75/D2,andsokey75hashes to slot 2 of tableT.  A secondary hash
tableS
j
stores all keys hashing to slotj.  The size of hash tableS
j
ism
j
Dn
2
j
, and the associated
hash function ish
j
.k/D..a
j
kCb
j
/modp/modm
j
.Sinceh
2
.75/D7,key75is stored in slot 7
of secondary hash tableS
2
. No collisions occur in any of the secondary hash tables, and so searching
takes constant time in the worst case.
call a hashing techniqueperfect hashingifO.1/memory accesses are required to
perform a search in the worst case.
To create a perfect hashing scheme, we use two levels of hashing, with universal
hashing at each level. Figure 11.6 illustrates the approach.
The  first  level  is  essentially  the  same  as  for  hashing  with  chaining:  we hash
thenkeys intomslots using a hash functionhcarefully selected from a family of
universal hash functions.
Instead of making a linked list of the keys hashing to slotj, however, we use a
smallsecondary hash tableS
j
with an associated hash functionh
j
.  By choosing
the hash functionsh
j
carefully, we can guarantee that there are no collisions at the
secondary level.
In order to guarantee that there are no collisions at the secondary level, however,
we will need to let the sizem
j
of hash tableS
j
be the square of the numbern
j
of
keys hashing to slotj.  Although you might think that the quadratic dependence
ofm
j
onn
j
may seem likely to cause the overall storage requirement to be exces-
sive, we shall show that by choosing the first-level hash function well, we can limit
the expected total amount of space used toO.n/.
We use hash functions  chosen from the universal  classes of hash functions of
Section 11.3.3.  The first-level hash function comes from the classH
pm
,whereas
in Section 11.3.3,pis a prime number greater  than any key value.   Those keys

11.5Perfect hashing279
hashing to slotjare re-hashed into a secondary hash tableS
j
of sizem
j
using a
hash functionh
j
chosen from the classH
p;m
j
.
1
We shall  proceed  in  two  steps.   First,  we shall  determine  how  to  ensure  that
the secondary tables have no collisions.  Second, we shall show that the expected
amount of memory used overall—for the primary hash table and all the secondary
hash tables—isO.n/.
Theorem 11.9
Suppose that we storenkeys in a hash table of sizemDn
2
using a hash functionh
randomly chosen from a universal class of hash functions. Then, the probability is
less than1=2that there are any collisions.
ProofThere are

n
2

pairs of keys that may collide; each pair collides with prob-
ability1=mifhis chosen at random from a universal familyHof hash functions.
LetXbe a random variable that counts the number of collisions.  WhenmDn
2
,
the expected number of collisions is
EŒX D
 
n
2
!

1
n
2
D
n
2
n
2

1
n
2
<1=2:
(This analysis is similar to the analysis of the birthday paradox in Section 5.4.1.)
Applying Markov’s inequality (C.30), Pr
f
Xt
g
EŒX  =t, withtD1,com-
pletes the proof.
In the situation described in Theorem 11.9, wheremDn
2
, it follows that a hash
functionhchosen at random fromHis more likely than not to havenocollisions.
Given the setKofnkeys to be hashed (remember thatKis static), it is thus easy
to find a collision-free hash functionhwith a few random trials.
Whennis large, however, a hash table of sizemDn
2
is excessive.  Therefore,
we adopt the two-level hashing approach, and we use the approach of Theorem 11.9
only  to  hash  the  entries  within  each  slot.   We  use  an  outer,  or  first-level,  hash
functionhto hash the keys intomDnslots.  Then, ifn
j
keys hash to slotj,we
use a secondary hash tableS
j
of sizem
j
Dn
2
j
to provide collision-free constant-
time lookup.
1
Whenn
j
Dm
j
D1,  we don’t really need a hash function for slotj;  when we choose  a hash
functionh
ab
.k/D..akCb/modp/modm
j
for such a slot, we just useaDbD0.

280Chapter 11Hash Tables
We now  turn  to  the  issue  of  ensuring  that  the  overall  memory  used  isO.n/.
Since  the sizem
j
of  thejth secondary  hash  table  grows quadratically  with the
numbern
j
of keys stored, we run the risk that the overall amount of storage could
be excessive.
If the first-level table size ismDn, then the amount of memory used isO.n/
for the primary hash table, for the storage of the sizesm
j
of the secondary hash
tables, and for the storage of the parametersa
j
andb
j
defining the secondary hash
functionsh
j
drawn from the classH
p;m
j
of Section 11.3.3 (except whenn
j
D1
and we useaDbD0). The following theorem and a corollary provide a bound on
the expected combined sizes of all the secondary hash tables.  A second corollary
bounds the probability that the combined size of all the secondary hash tables is
superlinear (actually, that it equals or exceeds4n).
Theorem 11.10
Suppose that we storenkeys in a hash table of sizemDnusing a hash functionh
randomly chosen from a universal class of hash functions. Then, we have
E
"
m1
X
jD0
n
2
j
#
<2n;
wheren
j
is the number of keys hashing to slotj.
ProofWe start with the following identity, which holds for any nonnegative inte-
gera:
a
2
DaC2
 
a
2
!
:(11.6)
We have
E
"
m1
X
jD0
n
2
j
#
DE
"
m1
X
jD0
 
n
j
C2
 
n
j
2
!!#
(by equation (11.6))
DE
"
m1
X
jD0
n
j
#
C2E
"
m1
X
jD0
 
n
j
2
!#
(by linearity of expectation)
DEŒnC2E
"
m1
X
jD0
 
n
j
2
!#
(by equation (11.1))

11.5Perfect hashing281
DnC2E
"
m1
X
jD0
 
n
j
2
!#
(sincenis not a random variable)  .
To evaluate the summation
P
m1
jD0

n
j
2

, we observe that it is just the total number
of pairs of keys in the hash table that collide. By the properties of universal hashing,
the expected value of this summation is at most
 
n
2
!
1
m
D
n.n1/
2m
D
n1
2
;
sincemDn. Thus,
E
"
m1
X
jD0
n
2
j
#
nC2
n1
2
D2n1
<2n:
Corollary 11.11
Suppose that we storenkeys in a hash table of sizemDnusing a hash func-
tionhrandomly chosen from a universal class of hash functions,  and we set the
size of each secondary  hash table tom
j
Dn
2
j
forjD0; 1; : : : ; m1.  Then,
the expected amount of storage required for all secondary hash tables in a perfect
hashing scheme is less than2n.
ProofSincem
j
Dn
2
j
forjD0; 1; : : : ; m1, Theorem 11.10 gives
E
"
m1
X
jD0
m
j
#
DE
"
m1
X
jD0
n
2
j
#
<2n;(11.7)
which completes the proof.
Corollary 11.12
Suppose that we storenkeys in a hash table of sizemDnusing a hash functionh
randomly  chosen  from  a  universal  class  of  hash  functions,  and  we  set  the  size
of each  secondary  hash table  tom
j
Dn
2
j
forjD0; 1; : : : ; m1.   Then,  the
probability  is less than1=2that the total storage used for secondary  hash tables
equals or exceeds4n.

282Chapter 11Hash Tables
ProofAgain we apply Markov’s inequality (C.30), Pr
f
Xt
g
EŒX  =t,this
time to inequality (11.7), withXD
P
m1
jD0
m
j
andtD4n:
Pr
(
m1
X
jD0
m
j
4n
)

E

P
m1
jD0
m
j

4n
<
2n
4n
D1=2 :
From Corollary 11.12, we see that if we test a few randomly chosen hash func-
tions  from the universal  family,  we will quickly  find one that  uses a reasonable
amount of storage.
Exercises
11.5-1?
Suppose that we insertnkeys into a hash table of sizemusing open addressing
and uniform hashing. Letp.n; m/be the probability that no collisions occur. Show
thatp.n; m/e
n.n1/=2m
.(Hint:See equation (3.12).)  Argue that whennex-
ceeds
p
m, the probability of avoiding collisions goes rapidly to zero.
Problems
11-1  Longest-probe bound for hashing
Suppose that  we use an open-addressed  hash table of sizemto storenm=2
items.
a.Assuming uniform hashing, show that foriD1;2;:::;n, the probability is at
most2
k
that theith insertion requires strictly more thankprobes.
b.Show that foriD1;2;:::;n, the probability isO.1=n
2
/that theith insertion
requires more than2lgnprobes.
Let the random variableX
i
denote the number of probes required by theith inser-
tion. You have shown in part (b) that Pr
f
X
i
>2lgn
g
DO.1=n
2
/. Let the random
variableXDmax
1in
X
i
denote the maximum number  of probes required by
any of theninsertions.
c.Show that Pr
f
X>2lgn
g
DO.1=n/.
d.Show that the expected length EŒX of the longest probe sequence isO.lgn/.

Problems for Chapter 11283
11-2  Slot-size bound for chaining
Suppose that we have a hash table withnslots, with collisions resolved by chain-
ing, and suppose thatnkeys are inserted into the table.  Each key is equally likely
to be hashed to each slot. LetMbe the maximum number of keys in any slot after
all the keys have been inserted.  Your mission is to prove anO.lgn=lg lgn/upper
bound on EŒM , the expected value ofM.
a.Argue that the probabilityQ
k
that exactlykkeys hash to a particular slot is
given by
Q
k
D

1
n

k

1
1
n

nk
 
n
k
!
:
b.LetP
k
be  the  probability  thatMDk,  that  is,  the  probability  that  the  slot
containing the most keys containskkeys. Show thatP
k
nQ
k
.
c.Use Stirling’s approximation, equation (3.18), to show thatQ
k
<e
k
=k
k
.
d.Show  that  there  exists  a  constantc>1such  thatQ
k
0
<1=n
3
fork
0
D
clgn=lg lgn. Conclude thatP
k
<1=n
2
forkk
0
Dclgn=lg lgn.
e.Argue that
EŒM Pr

M>
clgn
lg lgn

nCPr

M
clgn
lg lgn


clgn
lg lgn
:
Conclude that EŒM DO.lgn=lg lgn/.
11-3  Quadratic probing
Suppose  that  we  are  given  a  keykto  search  for  in  a  hash  table  with  positions
0; 1; : : : ; m1, and suppose that we have a hash functionhmapping the key space
into the set
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
. The search scheme is as follows:
1.  Compute the valuejDh.k/, and setiD0.
2.  Probe in positionjfor the desired keyk.  If you find it, or if this position is
empty, terminate the search.
3.  SetiDiC1.Ifinow equalsm, the table is full, so terminate the search.
Otherwise, setjD.iCj/modm, and return to step 2.
Assume thatmisapowerof2.
a.Show that this scheme is an instance of the general “quadratic probing” scheme
by exhibiting the appropriate constantsc
1
andc
2
for equation (11.5).
b.Prove that this algorithm examines every table position in the worst case.

284Chapter 11Hash Tables
11-4  Hashing and authentication
LetHbe a class of hash functions in which each hash functionh2Hmaps the
universeUof keys to
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
. We say thatHisk-universalif, for every
fixed  sequence  ofkdistinct  keyshx
.1/
;x
.2/
; :::; x
.k/
iand  for  anyhchosen  at
random fromH, the sequencehh.x
.1/
/; h.x
.2/
/; : : : ; h.x
.k/
/iis equally likely to be
any of them
k
sequences of lengthkwith elements drawn from
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
.
a.Show that if the familyHof hash functions is2-universal, then it is universal.
b.Suppose  that  the  universeUis  the  set  ofn-tuples  of  values  drawn  from
Z
p
D
f
0; 1; : : : ; p1
g
,wherepis  prime.Consider  an  elementxD
hx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
i2U.Foranyn-tupleaDha
0
;a
1
; :::; a
n1
i2U,de-
fine the hash functionh
a
by
h
a
.x/D
 
n1
X
jD0
a
j
x
j
!
modp:
LetHD
f
h
a
g
. Show thatHis universal, but not2-universal. (Hint:Find a key
for which all hash functions inHproduce the same value.)
c.Suppose that we modifyHslightly from part (b):  for anya2Uand for any
b2Z
p
,define
h
0
ab
.x/D
 
n1
X
jD0
a
j
x
j
Cb
!
modp
andH
0
D
f
h
0
ab
g
.  Argue thatH
0
is2-universal.  (Hint:Consider fixedn-tuples
x2Uandy2U,  withx
i
¤y
i
for  somei.   What  happens  toh
0
ab
.x/
andh
0
ab
.y/asa
i
andbrange overZ
p
?)
d.Suppose  that  Alice  and  Bob  secretly  agree  on  a  hash  functionhfrom  a
2-universal familyHof hash functions.  Eachh2Hmaps from a universe of
keysUtoZ
p
,wherepis prime. Later, Alice sends a messagemto Bob over the
Internet, wherem2U. She authenticates this message to Bob by also sending
an authentication tagtDh.m/, and Bob checks that the pair.m; t /he receives
indeed satisfiestDh.m/. Suppose that an adversary intercepts.m; t /en route
and tries to fool Bob by replacing the pair.m; t /with a different pair.m
0
;t
0
/.
Argue that the probability that the adversary succeeds in fooling Bob into ac-
cepting.m
0
;t
0
/is at most1=p, no matter how much computing power the ad-
versary has, and even if the adversary knows the familyHof hash functions
used.

Notes for Chapter 11285
Chapter notes
Knuth [211] and Gonnet [145] are excellent  references  for the analysis  of hash-
ing algorithms.  Knuth credits H. P. Luhn (1953) for inventing hash tables, along
with the chaining method for resolving collisions.  At about the same time, G. M.
Amdahl originated the idea of open addressing.
Carter and Wegman introduced the notion of universal classes of hash functions
in 1979 [58].
Fredman, Koml  ́os, and Szemer ́edi [112] developed the perfect hashing scheme
for static sets presented in Section 11.5.  An extension of their method to dynamic
sets, handling insertions and deletions in amortized expected timeO.1/, has been
given by Dietzfelbinger et al. [86].

12Binary Search Trees
The  search  tree  data  structure  supports  many  dynamic-set  operations,  including
S
EARCH,MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,PREDECESSOR,SUCCESSOR,INSERT,and
D
ELETE.   Thus,  we can use a search  tree both as a dictionary  and as a priority
queue.
Basic operations on a binary search tree take time proportional to the height of
the tree.  For a complete binary tree withnnodes, such operations run in‚.lgn/
worst-case time.  If the tree is a linear chain ofnnodes, however, the same oper-
ations take‚.n/worst-case time.  We shall see in Section 12.4 that the expected
height of a randomly built binary search tree isO.lgn/, so that basic dynamic-set
operations on such a tree take‚.lgn/time on average.
In  practice,  we  can’t  always  guarantee  that  binary  search  trees  are  built  ran-
domly, but we can design variations of binary search trees with good guaranteed
worst-case performance on basic operations.  Chapter 13 presents one such vari-
ation, red-black trees, which have heightO.lgn/.  Chapter 18 introduces B-trees,
which are particularly good for maintaining databases on secondary (disk) storage.
After presenting the basic properties of binary search trees, the following sec-
tions show how to walk a binary search tree to print its values in sorted order, how
to search for a value in a binary search tree, how to find the minimum or maximum
element, how to find the predecessor or successor of an element, and how to insert
into or delete from a binary search tree. The basic mathematical properties of trees
appear in Appendix B.
12.1  What is a binary search tree?
A binary search tree is organized, as the name suggests, in a binary tree, as shown
in Figure 12.1.  We can represent such a tree by a linked data structure in which
each node is an object.  In addition to akeyand satellite data, each node contains
attributesleft,right,andpthat point to the nodes corresponding to its left child,

12.1What is a binary search tree?287
5
25
5
8
7
6
(a)
6
8
7
5
2
(b)
Figure 12.1Binary search trees. For any nodex, the keys in the left subtree ofxare at mostx:key,
and the keys in the right subtree ofxare at leastx:key.  Different binary search trees can represent
the same set of values.  The worst-case running time for most search-tree operations is proportional
to the height of the tree.(a)A binary search tree on6nodes with height2.(b)A less efficient binary
search tree with height4that contains the same keys.
its right child, and its parent, respectively.  If a child or the parent is missing, the
appropriate attribute contains the value
NIL.  The root node is the only node in the
treewhoseparentis
NIL.
The keys in a binary search tree are always stored in such a way as to satisfy the
binary-search-tree property:
Letxbe a node in a binary search tree.  Ifyis a node in the left subtree
ofx,theny:keyx:key.Ifyis a node in the right  subtree  ofx,then
y:keyx:key.
Thus,  in Figure 12.1(a),  the key of the root  is6,  the  keys2,5,and5in its left
subtree are no larger than6,andthekeys7and8in its right subtree are no smaller
than6. The same property holds for every node in the tree. For example, the key5
in the root’s left child is no smaller than the key2in that node’s left subtree and no
larger than the key5in the right subtree.
The binary-search-tree  property allows us to print out all the keys in a binary
search tree in sorted order by a simple recursive algorithm, called aninorder tree
walk. This algorithm is so named because it prints the key of the root of a subtree
between printing the values in its left subtree and printing those in its right subtree.
(Similarly, apreorder tree walkprints the root before the values in either subtree,
and apostorder tree walkprints the root after the values in its subtrees.)  To use
the following procedure to print all the elements in a binary search treeT, we call
I
NORDER-TREE-WALK.T:root/.

288Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
INORDER-TREE-WALK.x/
1ifx¤
NIL
2INORDER-TREE-WALK.x:left/
3printx:key
4I
NORDER-TREE-WALK.x:right/
As an  example,  the  inorder  tree  walk  prints  the  keys  in  each  of  the  two  binary
search trees from Figure 12.1 in the order2; 5; 5; 6; 7; 8.   The correctness  of the
algorithm follows by induction directly from the binary-search-tree property.
It  takes‚.n/timetowalkann-node  binary  search  tree,  since  after  the  ini-
tial call,  the procedure calls itself recursively exactly twice for each node in the
tree—once  for its left child and once for its right child.  The following theorem
gives a formal proof that it takes linear time to perform an inorder tree walk.
Theorem 12.1
Ifxis  the  root  of  ann-node  subtree,  then  the  call  I
NORDER-TREE-WALK.x/
takes‚.n/time.
ProofLetT .n/denote  the  time  taken  by  I
NORDER-TREE-WALKwhen  it  is
called on the root of ann-node subtree.  Since I
NORDER-TREE-WALKvisits alln
nodes of the subtree, we haveT .n/D.n/. It remains to show thatT .n/DO.n/.
Since  I
NORDER-TREE-WALKtakes  a  small,  constant  amount  of  time  on  an
empty subtree (for the testx¤
NIL), we haveT.0/Dcfor some constantc>0.
Forn>0, suppose that I
NORDER-TREE-WALKis called on a nodexwhose
left subtree hasknodes and whose right subtree hasnk1nodes. The time to
perform I
NORDER-TREE-WALK.x/is bounded byT .n/T.k/CT.nk1/Cd
for some constantd>0that reflects an upper bound on the time to execute the
body of I
NORDER-TREE-WALK.x/, exclusive of the time spent in recursive calls.
We  use  the  substitution  method  to  show  thatT .n/DO.n/by  proving  that
T .n/.cCd/nCc.FornD0,wehave.cCd/0CcDcDT.0/.Forn>0,
we have
T .n/T.k/CT.nk1/Cd
D..cCd/kCc/C..cCd /.nk1/Cc/Cd
D.cCd/nCc.cCd/CcCd
D.cCd/nCc;
which completes the proof.

12.2Querying a binary search tree289
Exercises
12.1-1
For the set of
f
1; 4; 5; 10; 16; 17; 21
g
of keys, draw binary search trees of heights2,
3,4,5,and6.
12.1-2
What is the difference between the binary-search-tree property and the min-heap
property (see page 153)?  Can the min-heap property be used to print out the keys
of ann-node tree in sorted order inO.n/time? Show how, or explain why not.
12.1-3
Give a nonrecursive algorithm that performs an inorder tree walk.  (Hint:An easy
solution uses a stack as an auxiliary data structure.  A more complicated, but ele-
gant, solution uses no stack but assumes that we can test two pointers for equality.)
12.1-4
Give recursive algorithms that perform preorder and postorder tree walks in‚.n/
time on a tree ofnnodes.
12.1-5
Argue  that  since  sortingnelements  takes.nlgn/time  in  the  worst  case  in
the comparison model, any comparison-based algorithm for constructing a binary
search tree from an arbitrary list ofnelements takes.nlgn/time in the worst
case.
12.2  Querying a binary search tree
We  often  need  to  search  for  a  key  stored  in  a  binary  search  tree.   Besides  the
S
EARCHoperation,  binary  search  trees  can  support  such  queries  as  MINIMUM,
M
AXIMUM,SUCCESSOR,andPREDECESSOR.  In this section, we shall examine
these operations and show how to support each one in timeO.h/on any binary
search tree of heighth.
Searching
We use the following procedure to search for a node with a given key in a binary
search tree.  Given a pointer to the root of the tree and a keyk,T
REE-SEARCH
returns a pointer to a node with keykif one exists; otherwise, it returnsNIL.

290Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
2
4
3
13
7
6
1720
18
15
9
Figure 12.2Queries on a binary search tree. To search for the key13in the tree, we follow the path
15!6!7!13from the root.  The minimum key in the tree is2, which is found by following
leftpointers from the root. The maximum key20is found by followingrightpointers from the root.
The successor of the node with key15is the node with key17, since it is the minimum key in the
right subtree of15.  The node with key13has no right subtree, and thus its successor is its lowest
ancestor whose left child is also an ancestor. In this case, the node with key15is its successor.
TREE-SEARCH.x; k/
1ifx
==NILork==x:key
2returnx
3ifk<x:key
4returnT
REE-SEARCH.x:left;k/
5else returnT
REE-SEARCH.x:right;k/
The procedure begins its search at the root and traces a simple path downward in
the tree, as shown in Figure 12.2.  For each nodexit encounters, it compares the
keykwithx:key.  If the two keys are equal, the search terminates.  Ifkis smaller
thanx:key, the search continues in the left subtree ofx, since the binary-search-
tree property implies thatkcould not be stored in the right subtree. Symmetrically,
ifkis  larger  thanx:key,  the  search  continues  in  the  right  subtree.   The  nodes
encountered during the recursion form a simple path downward from the root of
the tree, and thus the running time of T
REE-SEARCHisO.h/,wherehis the height
of the tree.
We can rewrite this procedure in an iterative fashion by “unrolling” the recursion
into awhileloop. On most computers, the iterative version is more efficient.

12.2Querying a binary search tree291
ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH.x; k/
1whilex¤
NILandk¤x:key
2ifk<x:key
3xDx:left
4elsexDx:right
5returnx
Minimum and maximum
We can always find an element in a binary search tree whose key is a minimum by
followingleftchild pointers from the root until we encounter a
NIL,asshownin
Figure 12.2. The following procedure returns a pointer to the minimum element in
the subtree rooted at a given nodex, which we assume to be non-
NIL:
T
REE-MINIMUM.x/
1whilex:left¤
NIL
2xDx:left
3returnx
The binary-search-tree  property guarantees that T
REE-MINIMUMis correct.  If a
nodexhas no left subtree, then since every key in the right subtree ofxis at least as
large asx:key, the minimum key in the subtree rooted atxisx:key. If nodexhas
a left subtree, then since no key in the right subtree is smaller thanx:keyand every
key in the left subtree  is not larger  thanx:key,  the minimum key in the subtree
rooted atxresides in the subtree rooted atx:left.
The pseudocode for T
REE-MAXIMUMis symmetric:
T
REE-MAXIMUM.x/
1whilex:right¤
NIL
2xDx:right
3returnx
Both of these procedures run inO.h/time on a tree of heighthsince, as in T
REE-
S
EARCH, the sequence of nodes encountered forms a simple path downward from
the root.
Successor and predecessor
Given a node in a binary search tree, sometimes we need to find its successor in
the sorted order determined by an inorder  tree walk.  If all keys are distinct,  the

292Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
successor  of a nodexis the node with the smallest key greater thanx:key.The
structure  of a binary  search tree allows us to determine  the successor  of a node
without ever comparing keys.  The following procedure returns the successor of a
nodexin a binary search tree if it exists, and
NILifxhas the largest key in the
tree:
T
REE-SUCCESSOR.x/
1ifx:right¤
NIL
2returnTREE-MINIMUM.x:right/
3yDx:p
4whiley¤
NILandx==y:right
5xDy
6yDy:p
7returny
We break the code for T
REE-SUCCESSORinto two cases.  If the right subtree
of  nodexis nonempty,  then  the successor  ofxis just the  leftmost  node inx’s
right subtree,  which we find in line 2 by calling  T
REE-MINIMUM.x:right/.For
example,  the successor  of the node with key15in Figure 12.2 is the node with
key17.
On the other hand, as Exercise 12.2-6 asks you to show, if the right subtree of
nodexis empty andxhas a successory,thenyis the lowest ancestor ofxwhose
left child is also an ancestor ofx.  In Figure 12.2, the successor of the node with
key13is the node with key15.Tofindy, we simply go up the tree fromxuntil we
encounter a node that is the left child of its parent; lines 3–7 of T
REE-SUCCESSOR
handle this case.
The running time of T
REE-SUCCESSORon a tree of heighthisO.h/,sincewe
either follow a simple path up the tree or follow a simple path down the tree.  The
procedure T
REE-PREDECESSOR, which is symmetric to TREE-SUCCESSOR,also
runs in timeO.h/.
Even if keys are not  distinct,  we define the successor  and predecessor  of any
nodexas the node returned by calls made to T
REE-SUCCESSOR.x/and TREE-
P
REDECESSOR.x/, respectively.
In summary, we have proved the following theorem.
Theorem 12.2
We can implement the dynamic-set operations S
EARCH,MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,
S
UCCESSOR,andPREDECESSORso that each one runs inO.h/time on a binary
search tree of heighth.

12.2Querying a binary search tree293
Exercises
12.2-1
Suppose that we have numbers between 1 and 1000 in a binary search tree, and we
want to search for the number 363. Which of the following sequences couldnotbe
the sequence of nodes examined?
a.2, 252, 401, 398, 330, 344, 397, 363.
b.924, 220, 911, 244, 898, 258, 362, 363.
c.925, 202, 911, 240, 912, 245, 363.
d.2, 399, 387, 219, 266, 382, 381, 278, 363.
e.935, 278, 347, 621, 299, 392, 358, 363.
12.2-2
Write recursive versions of T
REE-MINIMUMand TREE-MAXIMUM.
12.2-3
Write the T
REE-PREDECESSORprocedure.
12.2-4
Professor Bunyan thinks he has discovered a remarkable property of binary search
trees.  Suppose that the search for keykin a binary search tree ends up in a leaf.
Consider three sets:A, the keys to the left of the search path;B, the keys on the
search  path;  andC,  the keys to the right  of  the search  path.   Professor  Bunyan
claims that any three keysa2A,b2B,andc2Cmust satisfyabc.Give
a smallest possible counterexample to the professor’s claim.
12.2-5
Show that if a node in a binary search tree has two children, then its successor has
no left child and its predecessor has no right child.
12.2-6
Consider  a binary  search treeTwhose keys are distinct.   Show that if the right
subtree of a nodexinTis empty andxhas a successory,thenyis the lowest
ancestor ofxwhose left child is also an ancestor ofx.  (Recall that every node is
its own ancestor.)
12.2-7
An  alternative  method  of  performing  an  inorder  tree  walk  of  ann-node  binary
search tree finds the minimum element in the tree by calling T
REE-MINIMUMand
then  makingn1calls  to  T
REE-SUCCESSOR.   Prove  that  this  algorithm  runs
in‚.n/time.

294Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
12.2-8
Prove  that  no  matter  what  node  we  start  at  in  a  height-hbinary  search  tree,k
successive calls to T
REE-SUCCESSORtakeO.kCh/time.
12.2-9
LetTbe a binary search tree whose keys are distinct, letxbe a leaf node, and lety
be its parent.  Show thaty:keyis either the smallest key inTlarger thanx:keyor
the largest key inTsmaller thanx:key.
12.3  Insertion and deletion
The operations  of insertion  and deletion cause the dynamic set represented  by a
binary search tree to change.  The data structure must be modified to reflect this
change, but in such a way that the binary-search-tree property continues to hold.
As we shall see, modifying the tree to insert a new element is relatively straight-
forward, but handling deletion is somewhat more intricate.
Insertion
To insert a new valueinto a binary search treeT, we use the procedure T
REE-
I
NSERT.   The  procedure  takes  a  node ́for  which ́:keyD, ́:leftDNIL,
and ́:rightD
NIL. It modifiesTand some of the attributes of ́in such a way that
it inserts ́into an appropriate position in the tree.
T
REE-INSERT.T;  ́/
1yD
NIL
2xDT:root
3whilex¤
NIL
4yDx
5if ́:key<x:key
6xDx:left
7elsexDx:right
8 ́:pDy
9ify
==NIL
10T:rootD ́//treeTwas empty
11elseif ́:key<y:key
12y:leftD ́
13elsey:rightD ́

12.3Insertion and deletion295
2
9
5
13
17
15
19
18
12
Figure 12.3Inserting an item with key13into a binary search tree. Lightly shaded nodes indicate
the  simple  path  from  the  root  down  to  the  position  where  the  item  is  inserted.   The  dashed  line
indicates the link in the tree that is added to insert the item.
Figure 12.3 shows how TREE-INSERTworks.  Just like the procedures  TREE-
S
EARCHand ITERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH,TREE-INSERTbegins at the root of the
tree and the pointerxtraces a simple path downward looking for a
NILto replace
with the input item ́. The procedure maintains thetrailing pointeryas the parent
ofx.   After initialization,  thewhileloop in lines 3–7 causes  these  two pointers
to move down the tree, going left or right depending on the comparison of ́:key
withx:key, untilxbecomes
NIL.ThisNILoccupies the position where we wish to
place the input item ́. We need the trailing pointery, because by the time we find
the
NILwhere ́belongs, the search has proceeded one step beyond the node that
needs to be changed. Lines 8–13 set the pointers that cause ́to be inserted.
Like the other primitive operations on search trees, the procedure T
REE-INSERT
runs inO.h/time on a tree of heighth.
Deletion
The overall strategy for deleting a node ́from a binary search treeThas three
basic cases but, as we shall see, one of the cases is a bit tricky.

If ́has no children, then we simply remove it by modifying its parent to re-
place ́with
NILas its child.

If ́has just one child, then we elevate that child to take ́’s position in the tree
by modifying ́’s parent to replace ́by ́’s child.

If ́has two children, then we find ́’s successory—which must be in ́’s right
subtree—and haveytake ́’s position in the tree.  The rest of ́’s original right
subtree becomesy’s new right subtree, and ́’s left subtree becomesy’s  new
left  subtree.   This case  is the  tricky  one  because,  as we shall  see,  it matters
whetheryis ́’s right child.

296Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
The procedure for deleting a given node ́from a binary search treeTtakes as
arguments pointers toTand ́. It organizes its cases a bit differently from the three
cases outlined previously by considering the four cases shown in Figure 12.4.

If ́has no left child (part (a) of the figure), then we replace ́by its right child,
which may or may not be
NIL.When ́’s right child isNIL, this case deals with
the situation in which ́has no children.  When ́’s right child is non-
NIL,this
case handles the situation in which ́has just one child, which is its right child.

If ́has just one child, which is its left child (part (b) of the figure), then we
replace ́by its left child.

Otherwise, ́has both a left and a right child.  We find ́’s successory,which
lies in ́’s right subtree and has no left child (see Exercise 12.2-5). We want to
spliceyout of its current location and have it replace ́in the tree.

Ifyis ́’s right child (part (c)),  then we replace ́byy, leavingy’s right
child alone.

Otherwise,ylies within ́’s right subtree but is not ́’s right child (part (d)).
In this case, we first replaceyby its own right child, and then we replace ́
byy.
In  order  to  move  subtrees  around  within  the  binary  search  tree,  we  define  a
subroutine T
RANSPLANT, which replaces one subtree as a child of its parent with
another subtree.  When T
RANSPLANTreplaces the subtree rooted at nodeuwith
the subtree  rooted at node, nodeu’s parent  becomes node’s parent,  andu’s
parent ends up havingas its appropriate child.
T
RANSPLANT.T;u;/
1ifu:p
==NIL
2T:rootD
3elseifu
==u:p:left
4u:p:leftD
5elseu:p:rightD
6if¤
NIL
7:pDu:p
Lines 1–2 handle the case in whichuis the root ofT. Otherwise,uis either a left
child or a right child of its parent.  Lines 3–4 take care of updatingu:p:leftifu
is a left child, and line 5 updatesu:p:rightifuis a right child.  We allowto be
NIL, and lines 6–7 update:pifis non-NIL.  Note that TRANSPLANTdoes not
attempt to update:leftand:right; doing so, or not doing so, is the responsibility
of T
RANSPLANT’s caller.

12.3Insertion and deletion297
qq
z(a)r
qq
z
l
(b)
q
z
l
(c)
q
y
l
y
q
z
l
(d)
r
q
z
lr
y
q
lr
y
r
l
x
x
x
y
x
x
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
NIL
Figure 12.4Deleting a node ́from a binary search tree.  Node ́may be the root, a left child of
nodeq, or a right child ofq.(a)Node ́has no left child.  We replace ́by its right childr,which
may or may not be
NIL.(b)Node ́has a left childlbut no right child. We replace ́byl.(c)Node ́
has two children; its left child is nodel, its right child is its successory,andy’s right child is nodex.
We replace ́byy, updatingy’s left child to becomel,butleavingxasy’s right child.(d)Node ́
has two children (left childland right childr), and its successory¤rlies within the subtree rooted
atr.  We replaceyby its own right childx,andwesetyto ber’s parent.  Then, we setyto beq’s
child and the parent ofl.

298Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
With the  TRANSPLANTprocedure  in hand,  here is the procedure  that  deletes
node ́from binary search treeT:
T
REE-DELETE.T;  ́/
1if ́:left
==NIL
2TRANSPLANT.T; ́; ́:right/
3elseif ́:right
==NIL
4TRANSPLANT.T; ́; ́:left/
5elseyDT
REE-MINIMUM. ́:right/
6ify:p¤ ́
7T
RANSPLANT.T;y;y:right/
8y:rightD ́:right
9y:right:pDy
10T
RANSPLANT.T; ́;y/
11y:leftD ́:left
12y:left:pDy
The  T
REE-DELETEprocedure  executes  the  four  cases  as follows.   Lines  1–2
handle the case in which node ́has no left child, and lines 3–4 handle the case in
which ́has a left child but no right child. Lines 5–12 deal with the remaining two
cases, in which ́has two children.  Line 5 finds nodey, which is the successor
of ́.  Because ́has a nonempty right subtree, its successor must be the node in
that subtree with the smallest key; hence the call to T
REE-MINIMUM. ́:right/.As
we noted before,yhas no left child. We want to spliceyout of its current location,
and it should replace ́in the tree. Ifyis ́’s right child, then lines 10–12 replace ́
as a child of its parent  byyand replacey’s left child by ́’s left child.   Ifyis
not ́’s left child, lines 7–9 replaceyas a child of its parent byy’s right child and
turn ́’s right child intoy’s right child, and then lines 10–12 replace ́as a child of
its parent byyand replacey’s left child by ́’s left child.
Each line of T
REE-DELETE, including the calls to TRANSPLANT, takes constant
time, except for the call to T
REE-MINIMUMin line 5.  Thus, TREE-DELETEruns
inO.h/time on a tree of heighth.
In summary, we have proved the following theorem.
Theorem 12.3
We can implement the dynamic-set operations I
NSERTand DELETEso that each
one runs inO.h/time on a binary search tree of heighth.

12.4Randomly built binary search trees299
Exercises
12.3-1
Give a recursive version of the T
REE-INSERTprocedure.
12.3-2
Suppose that we construct a binary search tree by repeatedly inserting distinct val-
ues  into  the  tree.   Argue  that  the  number  of  nodes  examined  in searching  for  a
value in the tree is one plus the number of nodes examined when the value was
first inserted into the tree.
12.3-3
We can sort a given set ofnnumbers by first building a binary search tree contain-
ing these numbers (using T
REE-INSERTrepeatedly to insert the numbers one by
one) and then printing the numbers by an inorder tree walk.  What are the worst-
case and best-case running times for this sorting algorithm?
12.3-4
Is the operation of deletion “commutative” in the sense that deletingxand theny
from a binary search tree leaves the same tree as deletingyand thenx? Argue why
it is or give a counterexample.
12.3-5
Suppose  that  instead  of  each  nodexkeeping  the  attributex:p,  pointing  tox’s
parent, it keepsx:succ, pointing tox’s successor.  Give pseudocode for S
EARCH,
I
NSERT,andDELETEon a binary search treeTusing this representation.  These
procedures should operate in timeO.h/,wherehis the height of the treeT.(Hint:
You may wish to implement a subroutine that returns the parent of a node.)
12.3-6
When  node ́in  T
REE-DELETEhas  two  children,  we  could  choose  nodeyas
its predecessor  rather  than its successor.   What other  changes  to  T
REE-DELETE
would be necessary  if we did so?  Some have argued  that a fair strategy,  giving
equal priority to predecessor  and successor,  yields better empirical performance.
How might T
REE-DELETEbe changed to implement such a fair strategy?
?12.4  Randomly built binary search trees
We  have  shown  that  each  of  the  basic  operations  on  a  binary  search  tree  runs
inO.h/time,  wherehis  the  height  of  the  tree.   The height  of  a binary  search

300Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
tree varies, however, as items are inserted and deleted. If, for example, thenitems
are inserted in strictly increasing order, the tree will be a chain with heightn1.
On the other hand, Exercise B.5-4 shows thath
b
lgn
c
.  As with quicksort, we
can show that the behavior of the average case is much closer to the best case than
to the worst case.
Unfortunately,  little is known about the average height of a binary search tree
when both insertion and deletion are used to create it.  When the tree is created
by insertion alone, the analysis becomes more tractable.  Let us therefore define a
randomly built binary search treeonnkeys as one that arises from inserting the
keys in random order into an initially empty tree, where each of thenŠpermutations
of the input keys is equally likely. (Exercise 12.4-3 asks you to show that this notion
is different from assuming that every binary search tree onnkeys is equally likely.)
In this section, we shall prove the following theorem.
Theorem 12.4
The expected height  of a randomly built binary search tree onndistinct keys is
O.lgn/.
ProofWe start by defining three random variables that help measure the height
of a randomly built binary search tree.  We denote the height of a randomly built
binary search onnkeys byX
n
, and we define theexponential heightY
n
D2
X
n
.
When we build a binary search tree onnkeys, we choose one key as that of the
root, and we letR
n
denote the random variable that holds this key’srankwithin
the set ofnkeys; that is,R
n
holds the position that this key would occupy if the
set of keys were sorted. The value ofR
n
is equally likely to be any element of the
set
f
1;2;:::;n
g
.IfR
n
Di, then the left subtree of the root is a randomly built
binary search tree oni1keys, and the right subtree is a randomly built binary
search tree onnikeys.  Because the height of a binary tree is1more than the
larger  of the heights of the two subtrees  of the root,  the exponential  height of a
binary tree is twice the larger of the exponential heights of the two subtrees of the
root. If we know thatR
n
Di, it follows that
Y
n
D2max.Y
i1
;Y
ni
/:
As base cases, we have thatY
1
D1, because the exponential height of a tree with1
node is2
0
D1and, for convenience, we defineY
0
D0.
Next, define indicator random variablesZ
n;1
;Z
n;2
;:::;Z
n;n
,where
Z
n;i
DI
f
R
n
Di
g
:
BecauseR
n
is  equally  likely  to  be  any  element  of
f
1;2;:::;n
g
,  it  follows  that
Pr
f
R
n
Di
g
D1=nforiD1;2;:::;n, and hence, by Lemma 5.1, we have
EŒZ
n;i
D1=n ;(12.1)

12.4Randomly built binary search trees301
foriD1;2;:::;n. Because exactly one value ofZ
n;i
is1and all others are0,we
also have
Y
n
D
n
X
iD1
Z
n;i
.2max.Y
i1
;Y
ni
// :
We  shall  show  that  EŒY
n
is  polynomial  inn,  which  will  ultimately  imply  that
EŒX
n
DO.lgn/.
We claim that the indicator random variableZ
n;i
DI
f
R
n
Di
g
is independent
of the values ofY
i1
andY
ni
.  Having chosenR
n
Di, the left subtree (whose
exponential  height isY
i1
) is randomly built on thei1keys whose ranks are
less thani.  This subtree is just like any other randomly built binary search tree
oni1keys.  Other than the number of keys it contains, this subtree’s structure
is not  affected  at all  by the choice  ofR
n
Di,  and hence the random  variables
Y
i1
andZ
n;i
are  independent.   Likewise,  the  right  subtree,  whose  exponential
height isY
ni
, is randomly built on thenikeys whose ranks are greater thani.
Its structure is independent of the value ofR
n
, and so the random variablesY
ni
andZ
n;i
are independent. Hence, we have
EŒY
n
DE
"
n
X
iD1
Z
n;i
.2max.Y
i1
;Y
ni
//
#
D
n
X
iD1
EŒZ
n;i
.2max.Y
i1
;Y
ni
//(by linearity of expectation)
D
n
X
iD1
EŒZ
n;i
EŒ2max.Y
i1
;Y
ni
/(by independence)
D
n
X
iD1
1
n
EŒ2max.Y
i1
;Y
ni
/(by equation (12.1))
D
2
n
n
X
iD1
EŒmax.Y
i1
;Y
ni
/(by equation (C.22))

2
n
n
X
iD1
.EŒY
i1
CEŒY
ni
/(by Exercise C.3-4)  .
Since each term EŒY
0
;EŒY
1
;:::;EŒY
n1
appears twice in the last summation,
onceasEŒY
i1
and once as EŒY
ni
, we have the recurrence
EŒY
n

4
n
n1
X
iD0
EŒY
i
:(12.2)

302Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
Using the substitution method, we shall show that for all positive integersn,the
recurrence (12.2) has the solution
EŒY
n

1
4
 
nC3
3
!
:
In doing so, we shall use the identity
n1
X
iD0
 
iC3
3
!
D
 
nC3
4
!
:(12.3)
(Exercise 12.4-1 asks you to prove this identity.)
For the base cases, we note that the bounds0DY
0
DEŒY
0
.1=4/

3
3

D1=4
and1DY
1
DEŒY
1
.1=4/

1C3
3

D1hold. For the inductive case, we have that
EŒY
n

4
n
n1
X
iD0
EŒY
i


4
n
n1
X
iD0
1
4
 
iC3
3
!
(by the inductive hypothesis)
D
1
n
n1
X
iD0
 
iC3
3
!
D
1
n
 
nC3
4
!
(by equation (12.3))
D
1
n

.nC3/Š
4Š .n1/Š
D
1
4

.nC3/Š
3Š nŠ
D
1
4
 
nC3
3
!
:
We have bounded  EŒY
n
,  but  our  ultimate  goal  is to bound  EŒX
n
.AsExer-
cise 12.4-4 asks you to show, the functionf.x/D2
x
is convex (see page 1199).
Therefore, we can employ Jensen’s inequality (C.26), which says that
2
EŒX
n

E

2
X
n

DEŒY
n
;
as follows:
2
EŒX
n


1
4
 
nC3
3
!

Problems for Chapter 12303
D
1
4

.nC3/.nC2/.nC1/
6
D
n
3
C6n
2
C11nC6
24
:
Taking logarithms of both sides gives EŒX
n
DO.lgn/.
Exercises
12.4-1
Prove equation (12.3).
12.4-2
Describe a binary search tree onnnodes such that the average depth of a node in
the tree is‚.lgn/but the height of the tree is!.lgn/.  Give an asymptotic upper
bound on the height of ann-node binary search tree in which the average depth of
a node is‚.lgn/.
12.4-3
Show that the notion of a randomly chosen binary search tree onnkeys,  where
each binary search tree ofnkeys is equally likely to be chosen, is different from
the notion of a randomly built binary search tree given in this section.  (Hint:List
the possibilities whennD3.)
12.4-4
Show that the functionf.x/D2
x
is convex.
12.4-5?
Consider R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORToperating on a sequence ofndistinct input
numbers.   Prove  that  for  any  constantk>0,allbutO.1=n
k
/of  thenŠinput
permutations yield anO.nlgn/running time.
Problems
12-1  Binary search trees with equal keys
Equal keys pose a problem for the implementation of binary search trees.
a.What is the asymptotic performance  of T
REE-INSERTwhen used to insertn
items with identical keys into an initially empty binary search tree?
We propose to improve T
REE-INSERTby testing before line 5 to determine whether
 ́:keyDx:keyand by testing before line 11 to determine whether ́:keyDy:key.

304Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
If equality holds, we implement one of the following strategies.  For each strategy,
find the asymptotic performance of insertingnitems with identical keys into an
initially empty binary search tree. (The strategies are described for line 5, in which
we compare the keys of ́andx.  Substituteyforxto arrive at the strategies for
line 11.)
b.Keep a boolean flagx:bat nodex, and setxto eitherx:leftorx:rightbased
on the value ofx:b, which alternates between
FALSEandTRUEeach time we
visitxwhile inserting a node with the same key asx.
c.Keep a list of nodes with equal keys atx, and insert ́into the list.
d.Randomly setxto eitherx:leftorx:right.  (Give the worst-case performance
and informally derive the expected running time.)
12-2  Radix trees
Given two stringsaDa
0
a
1
:::a
p
andbDb
0
b
1
:::b
q
, where eacha
i
and eachb
j
is in some ordered set of characters, we say that stringaislexicographically less
thanstringbif either
1.   there exists an integerj,where0jmin.p; q/, such thata
i
Db
i
for all
iD0; 1; : : : ; j1anda
j
<b
j
,or
2.p<qanda
i
Db
i
for alliD0; 1; : : : ; p.
For example,  ifaandbare bit strings,  then10100  <  10110by rule 1 (letting
jD3)and10100  <  101000by rule 2.  This ordering is similar to that used in
English-language dictionaries.
Theradix treedata structure shown in Figure 12.5 stores the bit strings 1011,
10, 011, 100, and 0.  When searching for a keyaDa
0
a
1
:::a
p
,wegoleftata
node of depthiifa
i
D0and right ifa
i
D1.LetSbe a set of distinct bit strings
whose lengths sum ton.  Show how to use a radix tree to sortSlexicographically
in‚.n/time.  For the example in Figure 12.5, the output of the sort should be the
sequence 0, 011, 10, 100, 1011.
12-3  Average node depth in a randomly built binary search tree
In this  problem,  we prove  that  the average  depth  of  a node  in a randomly  built
binary  search tree withnnodes isO.lgn/.  Although  this result is weaker than
that  of Theorem  12.4,  the technique  we shall  use reveals  a surprising  similarity
between the building of a binary search tree and the execution of R
ANDOMIZED-
Q
UICKSORTfrom Section 7.3.
We define thetotal path lengthP.T/of a binary treeTas the sum, over all
nodesxinT, of the depth of nodex, which we denote byd.x; T /.

Problems for Chapter 12305
011
0
100
10
1011
01
10
101
1
Figure 12.5A radix tree storing the bit strings 1011, 10, 011, 100, and 0.  We can determine each
node’s key by traversing the simple path from the root to that node.  There is no need, therefore, to
store the keys in the nodes;  the keys appear here for illustrative purposes only.  Nodes are heavily
shaded if the keys corresponding to them are not in the tree; such nodes are present only to establish
a path to other nodes.
a.Argue that the average depth of a node inTis
1
n
X
x2T
d.x; T /D
1
n
P.T/ :
Thus, we wish to show that the expected value ofP.T/isO.nlgn/.
b.LetT
L
andT
R
denote the left and right subtrees of treeT, respectively.  Argue
that ifThasnnodes, then
P.T/DP.T
L
/CP.T
R
/Cn1:
c.LetP .n/denote the average total path length of a randomly built binary search
tree withnnodes. Show that
P .n/D
1
n
n1
X
iD0
.P .i /CP.ni1/Cn1/ :
d.Show how to rewriteP .n/as
P .n/D
2
n
n1
X
kD1
P.k/C‚.n/ :
e.Recalling the alternative analysis of the randomized version of quicksort given
in Problem 7-3, conclude thatP .n/DO.nlgn/.

306Chapter 12Binary Search Trees
At each recursive invocation  of quicksort,  we choose a random pivot element to
partition the set of elements being sorted.  Each node of a binary search tree parti-
tions the set of elements that fall into the subtree rooted at that node.
f.Describe an implementation of quicksort in which the comparisons to sort a set
of elements are exactly the same as the comparisons to insert the elements into
a binary search tree. (The order in which comparisons are made may differ, but
the same comparisons must occur.)
12-4  Number of different binary trees
Letb
n
denote the number of different binary trees withnnodes.  In this problem,
you will find a formula forb
n
, as well as an asymptotic estimate.
a.Show thatb
0
D1and that, forn1,
b
n
D
n1
X
kD0
b
k
b
n1k
:
b.Referring to Problem 4-4 for the definition of a generating function, letB.x/
be the generating function
B.x/D
1
X
nD0
b
n
x
n
:
Show thatB.x/DxB.x/
2
C1, and hence one way to expressB.x/in closed
form is
B.x/D
1
2x

1
p
14x

:
TheTaylor expansionoff.x/around the pointxDais given by
f.x/D
1
X
kD0
f
.k/
.a/
kŠ
.xa/
k
;
wheref
.k/
.x/is thekth derivative offevaluated atx.
c.Show that
b
n
D
1
nC1
 
2n
n
!

Notes for Chapter 12307
(thenthCatalan number) by using the Taylor expansion of
p
14xaround
xD0.   (If  you  wish,  instead  of  using  the  Taylor  expansion,  you  may  use
the generalization of the binomial expansion (C.4) to nonintegral exponentsn,
where  for  any  real  numbernand  for  any  integerk,  we  interpret

n
k

to  be
n.n1/.nkC1/= kŠifk0,and0otherwise.)
d.Show that
b
n
D
4
n
p
n
3=2
.1CO.1=n//  :
Chapter notes
Knuth [211] contains a good discussion  of simple binary search trees as well as
many variations.  Binary search trees seem to have been independently discovered
by a number of people in the late 1950s. Radix trees are often called “tries,” which
comes from the middle letters in the wordretrieval.  Knuth [211] also discusses
them.
Many texts, including the first two editions of this book, have a somewhat sim-
pler method of deleting a node from a binary search tree when both of its children
are present.  Instead of replacing node ́by its successory, we delete nodeybut
copy its key and satellite data into node ́.  The downside of this approach is that
the node actually deleted might not be the node passed to the delete procedure.  If
other components of a program maintain pointers to nodes in the tree, they could
mistakenly end up with “stale” pointers to nodes that have been deleted. Although
the deletion method presented in this edition of this book is a bit more complicated,
it guarantees that a call to delete node ́deletes node ́and only node ́.
Section  15.5  will  show  how  to  construct  an  optimal  binary  search  tree  when
we know the search  frequencies  before  constructing  the tree.   That is,  given the
frequencies of searching for each key and the frequencies of searching for values
that fall between keys in the tree,  we construct  a binary search tree for which a
set of searches that follows these frequencies examines the minimum number of
nodes.
The proof in Section 12.4 that bounds the expected height of a randomly built
binary search tree is due to Aslam [24]. Mart ́ınez and Roura [243] give randomized
algorithms  for insertion  into and deletion  from  binary  search  trees in which the
result  of  either  operation  is  a  random  binary  search  tree.   Their  definition  of  a
random binary search tree differs—only  slightly—from  that of a randomly  built
binary search tree in this chapter, however.

13Red-Black Trees
Chapter 12 showed that a binary search tree of heighthcan support any of the basic
dynamic-set operations—such as S
EARCH,PREDECESSOR,SUCCESSOR,MINI-
MUM,MAXIMUM,INSERT,andDELETE—inO.h/time. Thus, the set operations
are fast if the height of the search tree is small.  If its height is large, however, the
set operations may run no faster than with a linked list.  Red-black trees are one
of many search-tree schemes that are “balanced” in order to guarantee that basic
dynamic-set operations takeO.lgn/time in the worst case.
13.1  Properties of red-black trees
Ared-black treeis a binary search tree with one extra bit of storage per node:  its
color, which can be either
REDorBLACK. By constraining the node colors on any
simple path from the root to a leaf, red-black trees ensure that no such path is more
than twice as long as any other, so that the tree is approximatelybalanced.
Each node of the tree now contains the attributescolor,key,left,right,andp.If
a child or the parent of a node does not exist, the corresponding pointer attribute
of the node contains the value
NIL. We shall regard theseNILs as being pointers to
leaves (external nodes) of the binary search tree and the normal, key-bearing nodes
as being internal nodes of the tree.
A red-black tree is a binary tree that satisfies the followingred-black properties:
1.   Every node is either red or black.
2.   The root is black.
3.   Every leaf (
NIL) is black.
4.   If a node is red, then both its children are black.
5.   For each node, all simple paths from the node to descendant leaves contain the
same number of black nodes.

13.1Properties of red-black trees309
Figure 13.1(a) shows an example of a red-black tree.
As a matter  of  convenience  in dealing  with boundary  conditions  in red-black
tree code, we use a single sentinel to represent
NIL(see page 238). For a red-black
treeT, the sentinelT:nilis an object with the same attributes as an ordinary node
in the tree.   Itscolorattribute  is
BLACK,  and its other attributes—p,left,right,
andkey—can take on arbitrary values. As Figure 13.1(b) shows, all pointers to
NIL
are replaced by pointers to the sentinelT:nil.
We use the sentinel so that we can treat a
NILchild of a nodexas an ordinary
node whose parent isx.  Although we instead could add a distinct sentinel node
for each
NILin the tree,  so that the parent of eachNILis well defined,  that ap-
proach would waste space.  Instead, we use the one sentinelT:nilto represent all
the
NILs—all leaves and the root’s parent. The values of the attributesp,left,right,
andkeyof the sentinel are immaterial, although we may set them during the course
of a procedure for our convenience.
We generally confine our interest to the internal nodes of a red-black tree, since
they hold the key values. In the remainder of this chapter, we omit the leaves when
we draw red-black trees, as shown in Figure 13.1(c).
We call the number of black nodes on any simple path from, but not including, a
nodexdown to a leaf theblack-heightof the node, denoted bh.x/. By property 5,
the notion of black-height is well defined, since all descending simple paths from
the node have the same number of black nodes.  We define the black-height of a
red-black tree to be the black-height of its root.
The following lemma shows why red-black trees make good search trees.
Lemma 13.1
A red-black tree withninternal nodes has height at most2lg.nC1/.
ProofWe start by showing that the subtree rooted at any nodexcontains at least
2
bh.x/
1internal nodes.  We prove this claim by induction on the height ofx.If
the height ofxis0,thenxmust be a leaf (T:nil), and the subtree rooted atxindeed
contains at least2
bh.x/
1D2
0
1D0internal nodes.  For the inductive step,
consider a nodexthat has positive height and is an internal node with two children.
Each child has a black-height of either bh.x/or bh.x/1, depending on whether
its color is red or black, respectively.  Since the height of a child ofxis less than
the height ofxitself, we can apply the inductive hypothesis to conclude that each
child has at least2
bh.x/1
1internal nodes. Thus, the subtree rooted atxcontains
at least.2
bh.x/1
1/C.2
bh.x/1
1/C1D2
bh.x/
1internal nodes, which proves
the claim.
To complete the proof of the lemma, lethbe the height of the tree.  According
to property 4, at least half the nodes on any simple path from the root to a leaf, not

310Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
NILNIL
NILNILNILNILNIL
NILNIL
NILNIL
NILNILNILNIL
NILNILNILNIL
NILNIL
26
41
47
30
2838
3539
17
21
2319
20
14
16
15
10
127
3
1
11
2
1
1
2
1
11
2
3
11
11
21
2
3
(a)
26
41
4730
2838
3539
17
21
2319
20
14
16
15
10
127
3
(b)
26
41
4730
2838
3539
17
21
2319
20
14
16
15
10
127
3
(c)
T:nil
Figure 13.1A red-black tree with black nodes darkened and red nodes shaded.  Every node in a
red-black tree is either red or black, the children of a red node are both black, and every simple path
from a node to a descendant leaf contains the same number of black nodes.(a)Every leaf, shown
as a
NIL, is black.  Each non-NILnode is marked with its black-height;NILs have black-height0.
(b)The same red-black tree but with each
NILreplaced by the single sentinelT:nil, which is always
black, and with black-heights omitted. The root’s parent is also the sentinel.(c)The same red-black
tree but with leaves and the root’s parent omitted entirely.  We shall use this drawing style in the
remainder of this chapter.

13.1Properties of red-black trees311
including the root, must be black. Consequently, the black-height of the root must
be at leasth=2; thus,
n2
h=2
1:
Moving  the1to  the  left-hand  side  and  taking  logarithms  on  both  sides  yields
lg.nC1/h=2,orh2lg.nC1/.
As an immediate consequence of this lemma, we can implement the dynamic-set
operations  S
EARCH,MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,SUCCESSOR,andPREDECESSOR
inO.lgn/time on red-black trees, since each can run inO.h/time on a binary
search tree of heighth(as shown in Chapter 12) and any red-black tree onnnodes
is a binary search tree with heightO.lgn/.  (Of course,  references to
NILin the
algorithms of Chapter 12 would have to be replaced byT:nil.)  Although the al-
gorithms T
REE-INSERTand TREE-DELETEfrom Chapter 12 run inO.lgn/time
when given a red-black tree as input, they do not directly support the dynamic-set
operations I
NSERTand DELETE, since they do not guarantee that the modified bi-
nary search tree will be a red-black tree.  We shall see in Sections 13.3 and 13.4,
however, how to support these two operations inO.lgn/time.
Exercises
13.1-1
In the style of Figure 13.1(a), draw the complete binary search tree of height3on
the keys
f
1;2;:::;15
g
.Addthe
NILleaves and color the nodes in three different
ways such that the black-heights of the resulting red-black trees are2,3,and4.
13.1-2
Draw the  red-black  tree  that  results  after  T
REE-INSERTis called  on the  tree  in
Figure 13.1 with key36.  If the inserted node is colored red, is the resulting tree a
red-black tree? What if it is colored black?
13.1-3
Let us define  arelaxed red-black treeas a binary  search  tree that  satisfies  red-
black properties 1, 3, 4, and 5. In other words, the root may be either red or black.
Consider a relaxed red-black treeTwhose root is red.  If we color the root ofT
black but make no other changes toT, is the resulting tree a red-black tree?
13.1-4
Suppose that we “absorb” every red node in a red-black tree into its black parent,
so that the children of the red node become children of the black parent.  (Ignore
what happens to the keys.)  What are the possible degrees of a black node after all

312Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
its red children are absorbed?  What can you say about the depths of the leaves of
the resulting tree?
13.1-5
Show that the longest simple path from a nodexin a red-black tree to a descendant
leaf  has  length  at  most  twice  that  of  the  shortest  simple  path  from  nodexto  a
descendant leaf.
13.1-6
What is the largest possible number of internal nodes in a red-black tree with black-
heightk? What is the smallest possible number?
13.1-7
Describe a red-black tree onnkeys that realizes the largest possible ratio of red in-
ternal nodes to black internal nodes. What is this ratio? What tree has the smallest
possible ratio, and what is the ratio?
13.2  Rotations
The search-tree operations TREE-INSERTand TREE-DELETE, when run on a red-
black tree withnkeys, takeO.lgn/time. Because they modify the tree, the result
may violate the red-black properties enumerated in Section 13.1.  To restore these
properties,  we must change the colors of some of the nodes in the tree and also
change the pointer structure.
We change the pointer structure throughrotation, which is a local operation in
a search tree that preserves the binary-search-tree property.  Figure 13.2 shows the
two kinds of rotations: left rotations and right rotations. When we do a left rotation
on a nodex, we assume that its right childyis notT:nil;xmay be any node in
the tree whose right child is notT:nil.  The left rotation “pivots” around the link
fromxtoy. It makesythe new root of the subtree, withxasy’s left child andy’s
left child asx’s right child.
The pseudocode for L
EFT-ROTATEassumes thatx:right¤T:niland that the
root’s parent isT:nil.

13.2Rotations313
y
x
αβ
γ
x
y
α
βγ
LEFT-ROTATE(T,x)
RIGHT-ROTATE(T,y)
Figure 13.2The rotation operations on a binary search tree.  The operation LEFT-ROTATE.T; x/
transforms the configuration of the two nodes on the right into the configuration on the left by chang-
ing a constant number of pointers. The inverse operation R
IGHT-ROTATE.T; y/transforms the con-
figuration on the left into the configuration on the right.  The letters ̨,ˇ,and
represent arbitrary
subtrees. A rotation operation preserves the binary-search-tree property: the keys in ̨precedex:key,
which precedes the keys inˇ, which precedey:key, which precedes the keys in
.
LEFT-ROTATE.T; x/
1yDx:right//sety
2x:rightDy:left//turny’s left subtree intox’s right subtree
3ify:left¤T:nil
4y:left:pDx
5y:pDx:p//linkx’s parent toy
6ifx:p
==T:nil
7T:rootDy
8elseifx
==x:p:left
9x:p:leftDy
10elsex:p:rightDy
11y:leftDx//putxony’s left
12x:pDy
Figure  13.3  shows  an  example  of  how  L
EFT-ROTATEmodifies  a  binary  search
tree. The code for R
IGHT-ROTATEis symmetric. Both LEFT-ROTATEand RIGHT-
R
OTATErun  inO.1/time.   Only  pointers  are  changed  by  a  rotation;  all  other
attributes in a node remain the same.
Exercises
13.2-1
Write pseudocode for R
IGHT-ROTATE.
13.2-2
Argue  that  in everyn-node  binary  search  tree,  there  are exactlyn1possible
rotations.

314Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
2
3
4
6
7
11
918
14
1217
19
22
20
x
y
2
3
4
6
7
18
19
14
1217
22
20
x
y
11
9
LEFT-ROTATE(T,x)
Figure 13.3An example of how the procedure LEFT-ROTATE.T; x/modifies a binary search tree.
Inorder tree walks of the input tree and the modified tree produce the same listing of key values.
13.2-3
Leta,b,andcbe arbitrary nodes in subtrees ̨,ˇ,and
, respectively, in the left
tree of Figure 13.2.  How do the depths ofa,b,andcchange when a left rotation
is performed on nodexin the figure?
13.2-4
Show that any arbitraryn-node binary search tree can be transformed into any other
arbitraryn-node binary search tree usingO.n/rotations.  (Hint:First show that at
mostn1right rotations suffice to transform the tree into a right-going chain.)
13.2-5?
We say that a binary search treeT
1
can beright-convertedto binary search treeT
2
if it is possible to obtainT
2
fromT
1
via a series of calls to RIGHT-ROTATE.Give
an example of two treesT
1
andT
2
such thatT
1
cannot be right-converted  toT
2
.
Then, show that if a treeT
1
can be right-converted toT
2
, it can be right-converted
usingO.n
2
/calls to RIGHT-ROTATE.

13.3Insertion315
13.3  Insertion
We can insert a node into ann-node red-black tree inO.lgn/time.  To do so, we
use a slightly modified version of the T
REE-INSERTprocedure (Section 12.3) to
insert node ́into the treeTas if it were an ordinary binary search tree, and then we
color ́red.  (Exercise 13.3-1 asks you to explain why we choose to make node ́
red rather than black.) To guarantee that the red-black properties are preserved, we
then call an auxiliary procedure RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPto recolor nodes and perform
rotations. The call RB-I
NSERT.T;  ́/inserts node ́, whosekeyis assumed to have
already been filled in, into the red-black treeT.
RB-I
NSERT.T;  ́/
1yDT:nil
2xDT:root
3whilex¤T:nil
4yDx
5if ́:key<x:key
6xDx:left
7elsexDx:right
8 ́:pDy
9ify
==T:nil
10T:rootD ́
11elseif ́:key<y:key
12y:leftD ́
13elsey:rightD ́
14 ́:leftDT:nil
15 ́:rightDT:nil
16 ́:colorD
RED
17    RB-INSERT-FIXUP.T;  ́/
The procedures  T
REE-INSERTand RB-INSERTdiffer in four ways.  First,  all
instances  of
NILin  TREE-INSERTare  replaced  byT:nil.   Second,  we set ́:left
and ́:righttoT:nilin  lines  14–15  of  RB-I
NSERT,  in  order  to  maintain  the
proper  tree  structure.   Third,  we  color ́red  in  line  16.   Fourth,  because  col-
oring ́red  may  cause  a  violation  of  one  of  the  red-black  properties,  we  call
RB-I
NSERT-FIXUP.T;  ́/in line 17 of RB-INSERTto restore the red-black prop-
erties.

316Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
RB-INSERT-FIXUP.T;  ́/
1while ́:p:color
==RED
2if ́:p== ́:p:p:left
3yD ́:p:p:right
4ify:color
==RED
5 ́:p:colorDBLACK//case 1
6y:colorD
BLACK//case 1
7 ́:p:p:colorD
RED//case 1
8 ́D ́:p:p//case 1
9else if ́
== ́:p:right
10 ́D ́:p//case 2
11L
EFT-ROTATE.T;  ́///case 2
12 ́:p:colorD
BLACK//case 3
13 ́:p:p:colorD
RED//case 3
14R
IGHT-ROTATE.T;  ́:p:p///case 3
15else(same asthenclause
with “right” and “left” exchanged)
16T:root:colorD
BLACK
To understand how RB-INSERT-FIXUPworks, we shall break our examination
of the code into three major  steps.   First,  we shall  determine  what violations  of
the  red-black  properties  are  introduced  in  RB-I
NSERTwhen  node ́is  inserted
and colored red.  Second, we shall examine the overall goal of thewhileloop in
lines  1–15.   Finally,  we shall  explore  each  of  the  three  cases
1
within  thewhile
loop’s body and see how they accomplish the goal.  Figure 13.4 shows how RB-
I
NSERT-FIXUPoperates on a sample red-black tree.
Which  of  the  red-black  properties  might  be  violated  upon  the  call  to  RB-
I
NSERT-FIXUP?  Property 1 certainly continues to hold, as does property 3, since
both  children  of  the newly inserted  red node are the sentinelT:nil.   Property  5,
which says that the number of black nodes is the same on every simple path from
a given node, is satisfied as well, because node ́replaces the (black) sentinel, and
node ́is red with sentinel children.  Thus, the only properties that might be vi-
olated are property 2, which requires the root to be black, and property 4, which
says that a red node cannot have a red child.  Both possible violations are due to ́
being colored red. Property 2 is violated if ́is the root, and property 4 is violated
if ́’s parent is red. Figure 13.4(a) shows a violation of property 4 after the node ́
has been inserted.
1
Case 2 falls through into case 3, and so these two cases are not mutually exclusive.

13.3Insertion317
z
y
11
2
17
5
4
8
14
15
z
y
11
2
17
5
4
8
14
15
(a)
(b)
Case 1
z
y
11
7
28
4
14
15(c)
Case 2
15
4
z
7
2
15
11
14(d)
Case 3
4
8
15
Figure 13.4The operation of RB-INSERT-FIXUP.(a)A node ́after insertion.  Because both ́
and its parent ́:pare red, a violation of property 4 occurs.  Since ́’s uncleyis red, case 1 in the
code applies. We recolor nodes and move the pointer ́up the tree, resulting in the tree shown in(b).
Once again, ́and its parent are both red, but ́’s uncleyis black.  Since ́is the right child of ́:p,
case2applies. We perform a left rotation, and the tree that results is shown in(c).Now, ́is the left
child of its parent, and case 3 applies.  Recoloring and right rotation yield the tree in(d),whichisa
legal red-black tree.

318Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
Thewhileloop in lines 1–15 maintains the following three-part invariant at the
start of each iteration of the loop:
a.  Node ́is red.
b.  If ́:pis the root, then ́:pis black.
c.  If the tree violates any of the red-black properties, then it violates at most
one of them, and the violation is of either property 2 or property 4. If the
tree violates property 2, it is because ́is the root and is red.  If the tree
violates property 4, it is because both ́and ́:pare red.
Part  (c),  which  deals  with  violations  of  red-black  properties,  is  more  central  to
showing that RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPrestores  the red-black  properties  than parts (a)
and (b), which we use along the way to understand situations in the code. Because
we’ll be focusing on node ́and nodes near it in the tree, it helps to know from
part (a) that ́is red. We shall use part (b) to show that the node ́:p:pexists when
we reference it in lines 2, 3, 7, 8, 13, and 14.
Recall that we need to show that a loop invariant is true prior to the first itera-
tion of the loop, that each iteration maintains the loop invariant, and that the loop
invariant gives us a useful property at loop termination.
We start with the initialization and termination arguments.  Then, as we exam-
ine how the body of the loop works in more detail,  we shall argue that the loop
maintains the invariant upon each iteration.  Along the way, we shall also demon-
strate that each iteration of the loop has two possible outcomes: either the pointer ́
moves up the tree, or we perform some rotations and then the loop terminates.
Initialization:Prior to the first iteration of the loop, we started with a red-black
tree with no violations, and we added a red node ́.  We show that each part of
the invariant holds at the time RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPis called:
a.  When RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPis called, ́is the red node that was added.
b.  If ́:pis the root, then ́:pstarted out black and did not change prior to the
call of RB-I
NSERT-FIXUP.
c.  We have  already  seen  that  properties  1,  3,  and 5 hold when  RB-I
NSERT-
F
IXUPis called.
If the tree violates  property  2,  then the red root  must be the newly added
node ́, which is the only internal node in the tree.  Because the parent and
both  children  of ́are the  sentinel,  which  is black,  the tree  does  not  also
violate property 4. Thus, this violation of property 2 is the only violation of
red-black properties in the entire tree.
If the tree violates property 4, then, because the children of node ́are black
sentinels  and  the  tree  had  no  other  violations  prior  to ́being  added,  the

13.3Insertion319
violation must be because both ́and ́:pare red. Moreover, the tree violates
no other red-black properties.
Termination:When the loop terminates, it does so because ́:pis black.  (If ́is
the root, then ́:pis the sentinelT:nil, which is black.)  Thus, the tree does not
violate property 4 at loop termination.  By the loop invariant, the only property
that might fail to hold is property 2. Line 16 restores this property, too, so that
when RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPterminates, all the red-black properties hold.
Maintenance:We actually need to consider six cases in thewhileloop, but three
of them are symmetric to the other three, depending on whether line 2 deter-
mines ́’s parent ́:pto be a left child or a right child of ́’s grandparent ́:p:p.
We have given the code only for the situation in which ́:pis a left child.  The
node ́:p:pexists,  since  by  part  (b)  of  the  loop  invariant,  if ́:pis the  root,
then ́:pis black.  Since we enter a loop iteration only if ́:pis red, we know
that ́:pcannot be the root. Hence, ́:p:pexists.
We distinguish case 1 from cases 2 and 3 by the color of ́’s parent’s sibling,
or “uncle.”  Line 3 makesypoint to ́’s uncle ́:p:p:right, and line 4 testsy’s
color.  Ifyis red, then we execute case 1.  Otherwise, control passes to cases 2
and 3.  In all three cases, ́’s grandparent ́:p:pis black, since its parent ́:pis
red, and property 4 is violated only between ́and ́:p.
Case 1: ́’s uncleyis red
Figure  13.5  shows  the  situation  for  case  1  (lines  5–8),  which  occurs  when
both ́:pandyare red.  Because ́:p:pis black, we can color both
 ́:pandy
black,  thereby  fixing  the  problem  of ́and ́:pboth  being  red,  and  we  can
color ́:p:pred, thereby maintaining property 5. We then repeat thewhileloop
with ́:p:pas the new node ́. The pointer ́moves up two levels in the tree.
Now, we show that case 1 maintains the loop invariant at the start of the next
iteration.  We use ́to denote node ́in the current iteration, and ́
0
D ́:p:p
to denote the node that will be called node ́at the test in line 1 upon the next
iteration.
a.  Because this iteration colors ́:p:pred, node ́
0
is red at the start of the next
iteration.
b.  The node ́
0
:pis ́:p:p:pin this iteration, and the color of this node does not
change.   If this node is the root,  it was black prior to this iteration,  and it
remains black at the start of the next iteration.
c.  We have already  argued  that  case 1 maintains  property  5,  and it  does not
introduce a violation of properties 1 or 3.

320Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
z
y
C
DA
B
α
βγ
δε
(a)
C
DA
B
α
βγ
δε
newz
y
C
DB
δε
C
D
B
A
αβ
γδε
newz
(b)
A
αβ
γ
z
Figure 13.5Case 1 of the procedure  RB-INSERT-FIXUP.  Property 4 is violated, since ́and its
parent ́:pare both red.  We take the same action whether(a) ́is a right child or(b) ́is a left
child.  Each of the subtrees ̨,ˇ,
,ı,and"has a black root, and each has the same black-height.
The code for case 1 changes the colors of some nodes, preserving property 5: all downward simple
paths from a node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. Thewhileloop continues with node ́’s
grandparent ́:p:pas the new ́. Any violation of property 4 can now occur only between the new ́,
which is red, and its parent, if it is red as well.
If node ́
0
is the root at the start of the next iteration, then case 1 corrected
the lone violation of property 4 in this iteration.  Since ́
0
is red and it is the
root, property 2 becomes the only one that is violated, and this violation is
due to ́
0
.
If node ́
0
is not the root at the start of the next iteration,  then case 1 has
not  created  a violation  of property  2.   Case 1 corrected  the lone  violation
of property 4 that existed at the start of this iteration.  It then made ́
0
red
and left ́
0
:palone.  If ́
0
:pwas black,  there is no violation of property  4.
If ́
0
:pwas red, coloring ́
0
red created one violation of property 4 between ́
0
and ́
0
:p.
Case 2: ́’s uncleyis black and ́is a right child
Case 3: ́’s uncleyis black and ́is a left child
In cases 2 and 3, the color of ́’s uncleyis black. We distinguish the two cases
according to whether ́is a right or left child of ́:p.  Lines 10–11 constitute
case 2, which is shown in Figure 13.6 together with case 3.  In case 2, node ́
is a right child of its parent.  We immediately use a left rotation to transform
the situation into case 3 (lines 12–14), in which node ́is a left child. Because

13.3Insertion321
C
A
B
α
βγ
δ
Case 2
z
y
B
A
αβ
γ
δ
Case 3
z
y
zA
B
C
αβγ δ
C
Figure 13.6Cases 2 and 3 of the procedure RB-INSERT-FIXUP. As in case 1, property 4 is violated
in either case 2 or case 3 because ́and its parent ́:pare both red. Each of the subtrees ̨,ˇ,
,andı
has a black root ( ̨,ˇ,and
from property 4, andıbecause otherwise we would be in case 1), and
each has the same black-height.  We transform case 2 into case 3 by a left rotation, which preserves
property 5: all downward simple paths from a node to a leaf have the same number of blacks. Case 3
causes some color changes and a right rotation, which also preserve property 5. Thewhileloop then
terminates, because property 4 is satisfied: there are no longer two red nodes in a row.
both ́and ́:pare red,  the rotation affects neither the black-height  of nodes
nor property 5. Whether we enter case 3 directly or through case 2, ́’s uncley
is  black,  since  otherwise  we  would  have  executed  case  1.   Additionally,  the
node ́:p:pexists, since we have argued that this node existed at the time that
lines 2 and 3 were executed, and after moving ́up one level in line 10 and then
down one level in line 11, the identity of ́:p:premains unchanged.  In case 3,
we execute some color changes and a right rotation, which preserve property 5,
and then, since we no longer have two red nodes in a row, we are done.  The
whileloop does not iterate another time, since ́:pis now black.
We now show that cases 2 and 3 maintain the loop invariant.  (As we have just
argued, ́:pwill be black upon the next test in line 1, and the loop body will not
execute again.)
a.  Case 2 makes ́point to ́:p, which is red. No further change to ́or its color
occurs in cases 2 and 3.
b.  Case 3 makes ́:pblack,  so that  if ́:pis the root  at  the  start  of  the next
iteration, it is black.
c.  As in case 1, properties 1, 3, and 5 are maintained in cases 2 and 3.
Since node ́is not the root in cases 2 and 3, we know that there is no viola-
tion of property 2. Cases 2 and 3 do not introduce a violation of property 2,
since the only node that is made red becomes a child of a black node by the
rotation in case 3.
Cases 2 and 3 correct the lone violation of property 4, and they do not intro-
duce another violation.

322Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
Having  shown  that  each  iteration  of  the  loop  maintains  the  invariant,  we  have
shown that RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPcorrectly restores the red-black properties.
Analysis
What is the running time of RB-I
NSERT? Since the height of a red-black tree onn
nodes isO.lgn/, lines 1–16 of  RB-I
NSERTtakeO.lgn/time.  In RB-INSERT-
F
IXUP,thewhileloop repeats only if case 1 occurs, and then the pointer ́moves
two levels up the tree.  The total number of times thewhileloop can be executed
is thereforeO.lgn/. Thus, RB-I
NSERTtakes a total ofO.lgn/time. Moreover, it
never performs more than two rotations, since thewhileloop terminates if case 2
or case 3 is executed.
Exercises
13.3-1
In line 16 of  RB-I
NSERT,  we set the color  of the newly inserted  node ́to red.
Observe that if we had chosen to set ́’s color to black, then property 4 of a red-
black tree would not be violated. Why didn’t we choose to set ́’s color to black?
13.3-2
Show the red-black trees that result after successively inserting the keys41; 38; 31;
12; 19; 8into an initially empty red-black tree.
13.3-3
Suppose that the black-height  of each of the subtrees ̨; ˇ; 
; ı; "in Figures 13.5
and 13.6 isk.  Label each node in each figure with its black-height to verify that
the indicated transformation preserves property 5.
13.3-4
Professor  Teach  is  concerned  that  RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPmight  setT:nil:colorto
RED, in which case the test in line 1 would not cause the loop to terminate when ́
is the root.  Show that the professor’s concern is unfounded by arguing that RB-
I
NSERT-FIXUPnever setsT:nil:colortoRED.
13.3-5
Consider a red-black tree formed by insertingnnodes with RB-I
NSERT.  Argue
that ifn>1, the tree has at least one red node.
13.3-6
Suggest  how  to  implement  RB-I
NSERTefficiently  if the  representation  for  red-
black trees includes no storage for parent pointers.

13.4Deletion323
13.4  Deletion
Like the other basic operations on ann-node red-black tree, deletion of a node takes
timeO.lgn/. Deleting a node from a red-black tree is a bit more complicated than
inserting a node.
The procedure for deleting a node from a red-black tree is based on the T
REE-
D
ELETEprocedure (Section 12.3). First, we need to customize the TRANSPLANT
subroutine that TREE-DELETEcalls so that it applies to a red-black tree:
RB-T
RANSPLANT.T;u;/
1ifu:p
==T:nil
2T:rootD
3elseifu
==u:p:left
4u:p:leftD
5elseu:p:rightD
6:pDu:p
The procedure RB-T
RANSPLANTdiffers from TRANSPLANTin two ways.  First,
line 1 references the sentinelT:nilinstead of
NIL. Second, the assignment to:pin
line 6 occurs unconditionally: we can assign to:peven ifpoints to the sentinel.
In fact, we shall exploit the ability to assign to:pwhenDT:nil.
The procedure RB-D
ELETEis like the TREE-DELETEprocedure, but with ad-
ditional lines of pseudocode.  Some of the additional lines keep track of a nodey
that might cause violations of the red-black properties.  When we want to delete
node ́and ́has fewer than two children, then ́is removed from the tree, and we
wantyto be ́.When ́has two children, thenyshould be ́’s successor, andy
moves into ́’s position in the tree.  We also remembery’s color before it is re-
moved from or moved within the tree, and we keep track of the nodexthat moves
intoy’s original position in the tree, because nodexmight also cause violations
of the red-black properties.  After deleting node ́, RB-D
ELETEcalls an auxiliary
procedure  RB-D
ELETE-FIXUP,  which changes  colors  and performs rotations  to
restore the red-black properties.

324Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
RB-DELETE.T;  ́/
1yD ́
2y-original-colorDy:color
3if ́:left
==T:nil
4xD ́:right
5RB-T
RANSPLANT.T; ́; ́:right/
6elseif ́:right
==T:nil
7xD ́:left
8RB-T
RANSPLANT.T; ́; ́:left/
9elseyDT
REE-MINIMUM. ́:right/
10y-original-colorDy:color
11xDy:right
12ify:p
== ́
13x:pDy
14elseRB-T
RANSPLANT.T;y;y:right/
15y:rightD ́:right
16y:right:pDy
17RB-T
RANSPLANT.T; ́;y/
18y:leftD ́:left
19y:left:pDy
20y:colorD ́:color
21ify-original-color
==BLACK
22RB-DELETE-FIXUP.T; x/
Although  RB-D
ELETEcontains almost twice as many lines of pseudocode as
T
REE-DELETE,  the two procedures have the same basic structure.  You can find
each  line of  T
REE-DELETEwithin  RB-DELETE(with the changes  of  replacing
NILbyT:niland replacing calls to TRANSPLANTby calls to RB-TRANSPLANT),
executed under the same conditions.
Here are the other differences between the two procedures:

We maintain nodeyas the node either removed from the tree or moved within
the tree.  Line 1 setsyto point to node ́when ́has fewer than two children
and is therefore removed. When ́has two children, line 9 setsyto point to ́’s
successor,  just as in T
REE-DELETE,andywill move into ́’s position in the
tree.

Because nodey’s color might change, the variabley-original-colorstoresy’s
color before any changes occur.  Lines 2 and 10 set this variable immediately
after  assignments  toy.When ́has  two children,  theny¤ ́and  nodey
moves into node ́’s original position in the red-black tree; line 20 givesythe
same color as ́.  We need to savey’s original color in order to test it at the

13.4Deletion325
end of RB-DELETE;  if it was black, then removing or movingycould cause
violations of the red-black properties.

As discussed,  we keep track of the nodexthat moves into nodey’s original
position.  The assignments in lines 4, 7, and 11 setxto point to eithery’s only
child  or,  ifyhas  no  children,  the  sentinelT:nil.   (Recall  from  Section  12.3
thatyhas no left child.)

Since nodexmoves into nodey’s original position, the attributex:pis always
set to point to the original position in the tree ofy’s parent, even ifxis, in fact,
the sentinelT:nil. Unless ́isy’s original parent (which occurs only when ́has
two children and its successoryis ́’s right child), the assignment tox:ptakes
place in line 6 of RB-T
RANSPLANT.  (Observe that when RB-TRANSPLANT
is called in lines 5, 8, or 14, the second parameter passed is the same asx.)
Wheny’s original parent is ́, however, we do not wantx:pto point toy’s orig-
inal parent, since we are removing that node from the tree. Because nodeywill
move up to take ́’s position in the tree, settingx:ptoyin line 13 causesx:p
to point to the original position ofy’s parent, even ifxDT:nil.

Finally, if nodeywas black, we might have introduced one or more violations
of the red-black properties,  and so we call  RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPin line 22 to
restore the red-black properties. Ifywas red, the red-black properties still hold
whenyis removed or moved, for the following reasons:
1. No black-heights in the tree have changed.
2. No red nodes have been made adjacent.   Becauseytakes ́’s place in the
tree, along with ́’s color, we cannot have two adjacent red nodes aty’s new
position in the tree. In addition, ifywas not ́’s right child, theny’s original
right childxreplacesyin the tree. Ifyis red, thenxmust be black, and so
replacingybyxcannot cause two red nodes to become adjacent.
3. Sinceycould not have been the root if it was red, the root remains black.
If nodeywas black, three problems may arise, which the call of RB-D
ELETE-
F
IXUPwill remedy.  First, ifyhad been the root and a red child ofybecomes the
new root,  we have violated property 2.  Second,  if bothxandx:pare red,  then
we have violated property 4.  Third, movingywithin the tree causes any simple
path that previously containedyto have one fewer black node.  Thus, property 5
is  now  violated  by  any  ancestor  ofyin  the  tree.   We  can  correct  the  violation
of property 5 by saying that nodex, now occupyingy’s original position, has an
“extra” black.  That is, if we add1to the count of black nodes on any simple path
that containsx, then under this interpretation, property 5 holds.  When we remove
or move the black nodey, we “push” its blackness onto nodex.  The problem is
that now nodexis neither  red nor black,  thereby  violating  property  1.  Instead,

326Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
nodexis either “doubly black” or “red-and-black,” and it contributes either2or1,
respectively, to the count of black nodes on simple paths containingx.Thecolor
attribute  ofxwill still  be  either
RED(ifxis  red-and-black)  orBLACK(ifxis
doubly black). In other words, the extra black on a node is reflected inx’s pointing
to the node rather than in thecolorattribute.
We can now see the procedure RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPand examine how it restores
the red-black properties to the search tree.
RB-D
ELETE-FIXUP.T; x/
1whilex¤T:rootandx:color
==BLACK
2ifx==x:p:left
3wDx:p:right
4ifw:color
==RED
5w:colorDBLACK//case 1
6x:p:colorD
RED//case 1
7L
EFT-ROTATE.T; x:p///case 1
8wDx:p:right//case 1
9ifw:left:color
==BLACKandw:right:color==BLACK
10w:colorDRED//case 2
11xDx:p//case 2
12else ifw:right:color
==BLACK
13w:left:colorDBLACK//case 3
14w:colorD
RED//case 3
15R
IGHT-ROTATE.T; w///case 3
16wDx:p:right//case 3
17w:colorDx:p:color//case 4
18x:p:colorD
BLACK//case 4
19w:right:colorD
BLACK//case 4
20L
EFT-ROTATE.T; x:p///case 4
21xDT:root//case 4
22else(same asthenclause with “right” and “left” exchanged)
23x:colorD
BLACK
The  procedure  RB-DELETE-FIXUPrestores  properties  1,  2,  and  4.   Exercises
13.4-1 and 13.4-2 ask you to show that the procedure restores properties 2 and 4,
and so in the remainder of this section, we shall focus on property 1.  The goal of
thewhileloop in lines 1–22 is to move the extra black up the tree until
1.xpoints to a red-and-black  node, in which case we colorx(singly) black in
line 23;
2.xpoints to the root, in which case we simply “remove” the extra black; or
3.   having performed suitable rotations and recolorings, we exit the loop.

13.4Deletion327
Within  thewhileloop,xalways  points  to a nonroot  doubly  black  node.   We
determine in line 2 whetherxis a left child or a right child of its parentx:p.(We
have given  the code  for  the situation  in whichxis a left child;  the situation  in
whichxis  a  right  child—line  22—is  symmetric.)   We maintain  a  pointerwto
the sibling ofx.  Since nodexis doubly black, nodewcannot beT:nil, because
otherwise, the number of blacks on the simple path fromx:pto the (singly black)
leafwwould be smaller than the number on the simple path fromx:ptox.
The four cases
2
in the code appear in Figure 13.7.  Before examining each case
in detail,  let’s look more generally at how we can verify that the transformation
in each of the cases preserves property 5.  The key idea is that in each case, the
transformation applied preserves the number of black nodes (includingx’s extra
black) from (and including) the root of the subtree shown to each of the subtrees
 ̨;ˇ;:::;.  Thus, if property 5 holds prior to the transformation,  it continues to
hold afterward.  For example, in Figure 13.7(a), which illustrates case 1, the num-
ber of black nodes from the root to either subtree ̨orˇis 3, both before and after
the transformation.  (Again, remember that nodexadds an extra black.) Similarly,
the number of black nodes from the root  to any of
,ı,",andis 2,  both be-
fore and after the transformation.  In Figure 13.7(b), the counting must involve the
valuecof thecolorattribute of the root of the subtree shown, which can be either
REDorBLACK.  If we define count.RED/D0and count.BLACK/D1, then the
number of black nodes from the root to ̨is2Ccount.c/, both before and after
the transformation. In this case, after the transformation, the new nodexhascolor
attributec, but this node is really either red-and-black (ifcD
RED) or doubly black
(ifcD
BLACK). You can verify the other cases similarly (see Exercise 13.4-5).
Case 1:x’s siblingwis red
Case 1 (lines 5–8 of RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPand Figure 13.7(a)) occurs when nodew,
the sibling of nodex, is red. Sincewmust have black children, we can switch the
colors ofwandx:pand then perform a left-rotation onx:pwithout violating any
of the red-black  properties.   The new sibling ofx, which is one ofw’s children
prior to the rotation, is now black, and thus we have converted case 1 into case 2,
3, or 4.
Cases 2,  3,  and 4 occur  when nodewis black;  they are distinguished  by the
colors ofw’s children.
2
As in RB-INSERT-FIXUP, the cases in RB-DELETE-FIXUPare not mutually exclusive.

328Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
Case 2:x’s siblingwis black, and both ofw’s children are black
In case 2 (lines 10–11  of  RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPand Figure 13.7(b)),  both  ofw’s
children  are black.  Sincewis also black,  we take one black off bothxandw,
leavingxwith only one black and leavingwred.  To compensate  for removing
one black fromxandw, we would like to add an extra black tox:p,whichwas
originally either red or black.  We do so by repeating thewhileloop withx:pas
the new nodex.  Observe that if we enter case 2 through case 1, the new nodex
is red-and-black,  since the originalx:pwas red.  Hence, the valuecof thecolor
attribute of the new nodexis
RED, and the loop terminates when it tests the loop
condition. We then color the new nodex(singly) black in line 23.
Case 3:x’s siblingwis black,w’s left child is red, andw’s right child is black
Case  3  (lines  13–16  and  Figure  13.7(c))  occurs  whenwis  black,  its  left  child
is  red,  and  its  right  child  is  black.   We  can  switch  the  colors  ofwand  its  left
childw:leftand then perform a right rotation onwwithout violating any of the
red-black properties.  The new siblingwofxis now a black node with a red right
child, and thus we have transformed case 3 into case 4.
Case 4:x’s siblingwis black, andw’s right child is red
Case 4 (lines 17–21 and Figure 13.7(d)) occurs when nodex’s siblingwis black
andw’s right child is red. By making some color changes and performing a left ro-
tation onx:p, we can remove the extra black onx, making it singly black, without
violating any of the red-black properties.  Settingxto be the root causes thewhile
loop to terminate when it tests the loop condition.
Analysis
What is the running time of RB-D
ELETE? Since the height of a red-black tree ofn
nodes isO.lgn/, the total cost of the procedure without the call to RB-D
ELETE-
F
IXUPtakesO.lgn/time.  Within RB-DELETE-FIXUP, each of cases 1, 3, and 4
lead  to termination  after  performing  a constant  number  of  color  changes  and at
most three rotations.  Case 2 is the only case in which thewhileloop can be re-
peated, and then the pointerxmoves up the tree at mostO.lgn/times, performing
no rotations. Thus, the procedure RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPtakesO.lgn/time and per-
forms at most three rotations,  and the overall time for  RB-D
ELETEis therefore
alsoO.lgn/.

13.4Deletion329
A
B
D
CE
αβ
γδεζ
xw
A
B
C
D
E
xneww
αβγ δ
εζ
A
B
D
CE
αβ
γδεζ
xw
c
A
B
D
CE
αβ
γδεζ
cnewx
A
B
D
CE
αβ
γδεζ
xw
c
A
B
C
D
αβγ
δ
εζ
x
c
neww
A
B
D
CE
αβ
γδ
εζ
xw
cc
αβ
A
B
C
D
E(d)
(c)
(b)
(a)
γδεζ
Case 4
Case 3
Case 2
Case 1
E
c′c′
newxDT:root
Figure 13.7The cases in thewhileloop of the procedure RB-DELETE-FIXUP.  Darkened nodes
havecolorattributes
BLACK, heavily shaded nodes havecolorattributesRED, and lightly shaded
nodes havecolorattributes represented bycandc
0
, which may be eitherREDorBLACK. The letters
 ̨;ˇ;:::;represent arbitrary subtrees.  Each case transforms the configuration on the left into the
configuration on the right by changing some colors and/or performing a rotation. Any node pointed
to byxhas an extra black and is either doubly black or red-and-black. Only case 2 causes the loop to
repeat.(a)Case 1 is transformed to case 2, 3, or 4 by exchanging the colors of nodesBandDand
performing a left rotation.(b)In case 2, the extra black represented by the pointerxmoves up the
tree by coloring nodeDred and settingxto point to nodeB. If we enter case 2 through case 1, the
whileloop terminates because the new nodexis red-and-black, and therefore the valuecof itscolor
attribute is
RED.(c)Case 3 is transformed to case 4 by exchanging the colors of nodesCandDand
performing a right rotation.(d)Case 4 removes the extra black represented byxby changing some
colors and performing a left rotation (without violating the red-black properties), and then the loop
terminates.

330Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
Exercises
13.4-1
Argue that after executing RB-D
ELETE-FIXUP, the root of the tree must be black.
13.4-2
Argue that if in RB-D
ELETEbothxandx:pare red, then property 4 is restored by
the call to RB-D
ELETE-FIXUP.T; x/.
13.4-3
In  Exercise  13.3-2,  you  found  the  red-black  tree  that  results  from  successively
inserting the keys41; 38; 31; 12; 19; 8into an initially empty tree.  Now show the
red-black  trees  that  result  from  the  successive  deletion  of  the  keys  in  the  order
8; 12; 19; 31; 38; 41.
13.4-4
In which lines of the code for RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPmight we examine or modify
the sentinelT:nil?
13.4-5
In each of the cases of Figure 13.7, give the count of black nodes from the root of
the subtree shown to each of the subtrees ̨;ˇ;:::;, and verify that each count
remains the same after the transformation.   When a node has acolorattributec
orc
0
, use the notation count.c/or count.c
0
/symbolically in your count.
13.4-6
Professors  Skelton  and  Baron  are  concerned  that  at  the  start  of  case  1  of  RB-
D
ELETE-FIXUP,  the nodex:pmight not be black.  If the professors  are correct,
then lines 5–6 are wrong. Show thatx:pmust be black at the start of case 1, so that
the professors have nothing to worry about.
13.4-7
Suppose that a nodexis inserted into a red-black tree with RB-I
NSERTand then
is immediately deleted with RB-D
ELETE.  Is the resulting red-black tree the same
as the initial red-black tree? Justify your answer.

Problems for Chapter 13331
Problems
13-1  Persistent dynamic sets
During the course of an algorithm, we sometimes find that we need to maintain past
versions of a dynamic set as it is updated. We call such a setpersistent.Onewayto
implement a persistent set is to copy the entire set whenever it is modified, but this
approach can slow down a program and also consume much space. Sometimes, we
can do much better.
Consider a persistent setSwith the operations I
NSERT,DELETE,andSEARCH,
which we implement  using  binary  search  trees as shown in Figure 13.8(a).   We
maintain a separate root for every version of the set.  In order to insert the key5
into the set, we create a new node with key5.  This node becomes the left child
of a new node with key7, since we cannot modify the existing node with key7.
Similarly,  the  new  node  with  key7becomes  the  left  child  of  a  new  node  with
key8whose right child is the existing node with key10. The new node with key8
becomes, in turn, the right child of a new rootr
0
with key4whose left child is the
existing node with key3. We thus copy only part of the tree and share some of the
nodes with the original tree, as shown in Figure 13.8(b).
Assume that each tree node has the attributeskey,left,andrightbut no parent.
(See also Exercise 13.3-6.)
4
3
2
8
710
4
3
2
8
710
4
8
7
5
(b)(a)
rrr′
Figure 13.8  (a)A binary search tree with keys2; 3; 4; 7; 8; 10.(b)The persistent binary search
tree that results from the insertion of key5. The most recent version of the set consists of the nodes
reachable from the rootr
0
, and the previous version consists of the nodes reachable fromr. Heavily
shaded nodes are added when key5is inserted.

332Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
a.For a general persistent binary search tree, identify the nodes that we need to
change to insert a keykor delete a nodey.
b.Write a procedure  P
ERSISTENT-TREE-INSERTthat, given a persistent treeT
and a keykto insert, returns a new persistent treeT
0
that is the result of insert-
ingkintoT.
c.If the height of the persistent binary search treeTish, what are the time and
space  requirements  of  your  implementation  of  P
ERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT?
(The space requirement is proportional to the number of new nodes allocated.)
d.Suppose that we had included the parent attribute in each node.  In this case,
P
ERSISTENT-TREE-INSERTwould need to perform additional copying.  Prove
that  P
ERSISTENT-TREE-INSERTwould  then  require.n/time  and  space,
wherenis the number of nodes in the tree.
e.Show how to use red-black trees to guarantee that the worst-case running time
and space areO.lgn/per insertion or deletion.
13-2  Join operation on red-black trees
Thejoinoperation takes two dynamic setsS
1
andS
2
andanelementxsuch that
for anyx
1
2S
1
andx
2
2S
2
,wehavex
1
:keyx:keyx
2
:key.  It returns a set
SDS
1
[
f
x
g
[S
2
.  In this problem, we investigate how to implement the join
operation on red-black trees.
a.Given a red-black treeT, let us store its black-height as the new attributeT:bh.
Argue that RB-I
NSERTand RB-DELETEcan maintain thebhattribute with-
out requiring extra storage in the nodes of the tree and without increasing the
asymptotic running times.  Show that while descending throughT, we can de-
termine the black-height of each node we visit inO.1/time per node visited.
We wish to implement the operation RB-J
OIN.T
1
;x;T
2
/, which destroysT
1
andT
2
and returns a red-black treeTDT
1
[
f
x
g
[T
2
.Letnbe the total number of nodes
inT
1
andT
2
.
b.Assume thatT
1
:bhT
2
:bh.  Describe anO.lgn/-time algorithm that finds a
black nodeyinT
1
with the largest key from among those nodes whose black-
height isT
2
:bh.
c.LetT
y
be the subtree rooted aty. Describe howT
y
[
f
x
g
[T
2
can replaceT
y
inO.1/time without destroying the binary-search-tree property.
d.What color should we makexso that red-black properties 1, 3, and 5 are main-
tained? Describe how to enforce properties 2 and 4 inO.lgn/time.

Problems for Chapter 13333
e.Argue that no generality is lost by making the assumption in part (b). Describe
the symmetric situation that arises whenT
1
:bhT
2
:bh.
f.Argue that the running time of RB-J
OINisO.lgn/.
13-3  AVL trees
AnAVL treeis a binary search tree that isheight balanced:  for each nodex,the
heights of the left and right subtrees ofxdiffer by at most1. To implement an AVL
tree, we maintain an extra attribute in each node:x:his the height of nodex.As
for any other binary search treeT, we assume thatT:rootpoints to the root node.
a.Prove  that  an  AVL tree  withnnodes  has  heightO.lgn/.(Hint:Prove  that
an AVL tree of heighthhas at leastF
h
nodes, whereF
h
is thehth Fibonacci
number.)
b.To insert into an AVL tree, we first place a node into the appropriate place in bi-
nary search tree order. Afterward, the tree might no longer be height balanced.
Specifically, the heights of the left and right children of some node might differ
by2.  Describe a procedure  B
ALANCE.x/, which takes a subtree rooted atx
whose left and right children are height balanced and have heights that differ
by at most2, i.e.,
j
x:right:hx:left:h
j
2, and alters the subtree rooted atx
to be height balanced. (Hint:Use rotations.)
c.Using  part  (b),  describe  a recursive  procedure  AVL-I
NSERT.x;  ́/that  takes
a nodexwithin an AVL tree and a newly created node ́(whose key has al-
ready  been  filled in),  and  adds ́to the  subtree  rooted  atx,  maintaining  the
property  thatxis  the  root  of  an  AVL tree.   As  in  T
REE-INSERTfrom  Sec-
tion 12.3, assume that ́:keyhas already been filled in and that ́:leftD
NIL
and ́:rightDNIL; also assume that ́:hD0.  Thus, to insert the node ́into
the AVL treeT, we call AVL-I
NSERT.T:root; ́/.
d.Show that AVL-I
NSERT,  run on ann-node AVL tree, takesO.lgn/time and
performsO.1/rotations.
13-4  Treaps
If we insert a set ofnitems into a binary search tree,  the resulting  tree may be
horribly  unbalanced,  leading  to long  search  times.   As we saw  in Section  12.4,
however, randomly built binary search trees tend to be balanced.  Therefore, one
strategy that, on average, builds a balanced tree for a fixed set of items would be to
randomly permute the items and then insert them in that order into the tree.
What if we do not have all the items at once?  If we receive the items one at a
time, can we still randomly build a binary search tree out of them?

334Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
G: 4
B: 7H: 5
A: 10E: 23K: 65
I: 73
Figure 13.9A treap.  Each nodexis labeled withx:key:x:priority.  For example, the root has
keyGand priority 4.
We will examine a data structure that answers this question in the affirmative. A
treapis a binary search tree with a modified way of ordering the nodes. Figure 13.9
shows an example.  As usual,  each nodexin the tree has a key valuex:key.In
addition,  we assignx:priority, which is a random number chosen independently
for each node.  We assume that all priorities are distinct and also that all keys are
distinct. The nodes of the treap are ordered so that the keys obey the binary-search-
tree property and the priorities obey the min-heap order property:

Ifis a left child ofu,then:key<u:key.

Ifis a right child ofu,then:key>u:key.

Ifis a child ofu,then:priority>u:priority.
(This combination of properties is why the tree is called a “treap”:  it has features
of both a binary search tree and a heap.)
It helps to think of treaps in the following way.  Suppose that we insert nodes
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
, with associated keys, into a treap.  Then the resulting treap is the
tree  that  would  have  been  formed  if  the  nodes  had  been  inserted  into  a  normal
binary  search  tree  in  the  order  given  by  their  (randomly  chosen)  priorities,  i.e.,
x
i
:priority<x
j
:prioritymeans that we had insertedx
i
beforex
j
.
a.Show that given a set of nodesx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
, with associated keys and priori-
ties, all distinct, the treap associated with these nodes is unique.
b.Show that the expected height of a treap is‚.lgn/, and hence the expected time
to search for a value in the treap is‚.lgn/.
Let us see how to insert a new node into an existing treap.  The first thing we do
is assign to the new node a random priority.  Then we call the insertion algorithm,
which we call T
REAP-INSERT, whose operation is illustrated in Figure 13.10.

Problems for Chapter 13335
G: 4
B: 7H: 5
A: 10E: 23K: 65
I: 73
G: 4
B: 7H: 5
A: 10E: 23K: 65
I: 73
C: 25
C: 25
(a)(b)
G: 4
B: 7H: 5
A: 10E: 23K: 65
I: 73C: 25
(c)
D: 9
D: 9
G: 4
B: 7H: 5
A: 10E: 23K: 65
I: 73
(d)
D: 9
C: 25
G: 4
B: 7H: 5
A: 10K: 65
I: 73
(e)
D: 9
C: 25E: 23
B: 7
A: 10
(f)
D: 9
C: 25E: 23
F: 2
I: 73
K: 65
H: 5
G: 4
F: 2
...
Figure 13.10The operation of TREAP-INSERT.(a)The original treap, prior to insertion.(b)The
treap after inserting a node with keyCand priority 25.(c)–(d)Intermediate stages when inserting a
node with keyDand priority 9.(e)The treap after the insertion of parts (c) and (d) is done.(f)The
treap after inserting a node with keyFand priority 2.

336Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
15
918
31225
216
(a)
15
918
31225
216
(b)
Figure 13.11Spines of a binary search tree.  The left spine is shaded in(a), and the right spine is
shaded in(b).
c.Explain how TREAP-INSERTworks. Explain the idea in English and give pseu-
docode.   (Hint:Execute the usual  binary-search-tree  insertion  procedure  and
then perform rotations to restore the min-heap order property.)
d.Show that the expected running time of T
REAP-INSERTis‚.lgn/.
T
REAP-INSERTperforms  a  search  and  then  a  sequence  of  rotations.   Although
these  two  operations  have  the  same  expected  running  time,  they  have  different
costs in practice.  A search reads information from the treap without modifying it.
In contrast, a rotation changes parent and child pointers within the treap. On most
computers, read operations are much faster than write operations.  Thus we would
like  T
REAP-INSERTto  perform  few  rotations.   We  will  show  that  the  expected
number of rotations performed is bounded by a constant.
In order to do so, we will need some definitions,  which Figure 13.11 depicts.
Theleft spineof a binary search treeTis the simple path from the root to the node
with the smallest key.  In other words, the left spine is the simple path from the
root  that consists of only left edges.   Symmetrically,  theright spineofTis the
simple path from the root consisting of only right edges.  Thelengthof a spine is
the number of nodes it contains.
e.Consider the treapTimmediately after T
REAP-INSERThas inserted nodex.
LetCbe the length of the right spine of the left subtree ofx.LetDbe the
length of the left spine of the right subtree ofx. Prove that the total number of
rotations that were performed during the insertion ofxis equal toCCD.
We will now calculate the expected values ofCandD. Without loss of generality,
we assume that the keys are1;2;:::;n, since we are comparing them only to one
another.

Notes for Chapter 13337
For nodesxandyin treapT,wherey¤x,letkDx:keyandiDy:key.We
define indicator random variables
X
ik
DI
f
yis in the right spine of the left subtree ofx
g
:
f.Show thatX
ik
D1if and only ify:priority>x:priority,y:key<x:key, and,
for every ́such thaty:key< ́:key<x:key,wehavey:priority< ́:priority.
g.Show that
Pr
f
X
ik
D1
g
D
.ki1/Š
.kiC1/Š
D
1
.kiC1/.ki/
:
h.Show that
EŒC D
k1
X
jD1
1
j.jC1/
D1
1
k
:
i.Use a symmetry argument to show that
EŒDD1
1
nkC1
:
j.Conclude  that  the  expected  number  of  rotations  performed  when  inserting  a
node into a treap is less than 2.
Chapter notes
The idea of balancing a search tree is due to Adel’son-Vel’ski ̆ı and Landis [2], who
introduced a class of balanced search trees called “AVL trees” in 1962, described in
Problem 13-3. Another class of search trees, called “2-3 trees,” was introduced by
J. E. Hopcroft (unpublished) in 1970. A 2-3 tree maintains balance by manipulating
the degrees of nodes in the tree.  Chapter 18 covers a generalization  of 2-3 trees
introduced by Bayer and McCreight [35], called “B-trees.”
Red-black trees were invented by Bayer [34] under the name “symmetric binary
B-trees.”  Guibas and Sedgewick [155] studied their properties  at length and in-
troduced the red/black color convention.  Andersson [15] gives a simpler-to-code

338Chapter 13Red-Black Trees
variant of red-black trees.  Weiss [351] calls this variant AA-trees.  An AA-tree is
similar to a red-black tree except that left children may never be red.
Treaps, the subject of Problem 13-4, were proposed by Seidel and Aragon [309].
They are the default implementation  of a dictionary  in LEDA [253],  which is a
well-implemented collection of data structures and algorithms.
There  are  many  other  variations  on  balanced  binary  trees,  including  weight-
balanced trees [264],k-neighbor trees [245], and scapegoat trees [127].  Perhaps
the most intriguing are the “splay trees” introduced by Sleator and Tarjan [320],
which are “self-adjusting.” (See Tarjan [330] for a good description of splay trees.)
Splay trees maintain balance without any explicit balance condition such as color.
Instead, “splay operations” (which involve rotations) are performed within the tree
every time an access is made. The amortized cost (see Chapter 17) of each opera-
tiononann-node tree isO.lgn/.
Skip lists [286] provide an alternative to balanced binary trees.  A skip list is a
linked list that is augmented with a number of additional pointers. Each dictionary
operation runs in expected timeO.lgn/on a skip list ofnitems.

14Augmenting Data Structures
Some  engineering  situations  require  no  more  than  a  “textbook”  data  struc-
ture—such as a doubly linked list, a hash table, or a binary search tree—but many
others require a dash of creativity.   Only in rare situations  will you need to cre-
ate an entirely new type of data structure,  though.  More often,  it will suffice to
augment a textbook data structure by storing additional information in it. You can
then program new operations for the data structure to support the desired applica-
tion. Augmenting a data structure is not always straightforward, however, since the
added information must be updated and maintained by the ordinary operations on
the data structure.
This chapter discusses two data structures that we construct by augmenting red-
black trees.   Section 14.1 describes  a data structure  that  supports  general  order-
statistic operations  on a dynamic set.  We can then quickly find theith smallest
number  in  a  set  or  the  rank  of  a given  element  in  the  total  ordering  of  the  set.
Section 14.2 abstracts the process of augmenting a data structure and provides a
theorem that can simplify the process of augmenting red-black trees. Section 14.3
uses this theorem to help design a data structure for maintaining a dynamic set of
intervals, such as time intervals.  Given a query interval, we can then quickly find
an interval in the set that overlaps it.
14.1  Dynamic order statistics
Chapter  9 introduced  the notion of an order  statistic.   Specifically,  theith order
statistic of a set ofnelements, wherei2
f
1;2;:::;n
g
, is simply the element in the
set with theith smallest key. We saw how to determine any order statistic inO.n/
time from an unordered set.  In this section, we shall see how to modify red-black
trees so that we can determine any order statistic for a dynamic set inO.lgn/time.
We shall also see how to compute therankof an element—its position in the linear
order of the set—inO.lgn/time.

340Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
1
3
712
10
14
16
14
21
1
24
7
20
1921
21
17
28
3539
38
4730
41
26
1
21
4
12
1
11
3
51
7
20
key
size
Figure 14.1An order-statistic tree, which is an augmented red-black tree.  Shaded nodes are red,
and darkened nodes are black. In addition to its usual attributes, each nodexhas an attributex:size,
which is the number of nodes, other than the sentinel, in the subtree rooted atx.
Figure 14.1 shows a data structure that can support fast order-statistic operations.
Anorder-statistic treeTis  simply  a red-black  tree with  additional  information
stored in each node. Besides the usual red-black tree attributesx:key,x:color,x:p,
x:left,andx:rightin a nodex, we have another attribute,x:size.  This attribute
contains  the  number  of  (internal)  nodes  in  the  subtree  rooted  atx(includingx
itself), that is, the size of the subtree.  If we define the sentinel’s size to be0—that
is, we setT:nil:sizeto be0—then we have the identity
x:sizeDx:left:sizeCx:right:sizeC1:
We do not require keys to be distinct in an order-statistic tree. (For example, the
tree in Figure 14.1 has two keys with value 14 and two keys with value 21.) In the
presence of equal keys, the above notion of rank is not well defined.  We remove
this ambiguity for an order-statistic tree by defining the rank of an element as the
position at which it would be printed in an inorder walk of the tree. In Figure 14.1,
for example, the key 14 stored in a black node has rank 5, and the key 14 stored in
a red node has rank 6.
Retrieving an element with a given rank
Before we show how to maintain this size information during insertion and dele-
tion, let us examine the implementation of two order-statistic queries that use this
additional information.  We begin with an operation that retrieves an element with
a given rank.  The procedure OS-S
ELECT.x; i /returns a pointer to the node con-
taining theith smallest key in the subtree rooted atx. To find the node with theith
smallest key in an order-statistic treeT, we call OS-S
ELECT.T:root;i/.

14.1Dynamic order statistics341
OS-SELECT.x; i /
1rDx:left:sizeC1
2ifi
==r
3returnx
4elseifi<r
5returnOS-S
ELECT.x:left;i/
6else returnOS-S
ELECT.x:right;ir/
In line 1 of OS-S
ELECT, we computer, the rank of nodexwithin the subtree
rooted atx.Thevalueofx:left:sizeis the number of nodes that come beforex
in an  inorder  tree  walk  of  the  subtree  rooted  atx.   Thus,x:left:sizeC1is the
rank ofxwithin the subtree rooted atx.IfiDr, then nodexis theith smallest
element,  and so we returnxin line  3.   Ifi<r,  then theith smallest  element
resides inx’s left subtree,  and so we recurse onx:leftin line 5.  Ifi>r,then
theith smallest element resides inx’s right subtree.  Since the subtree rooted atx
containsrelements that come beforex’s right subtree in an inorder tree walk, the
ith smallest element in the subtree rooted atxis the.ir/th smallest element in
the subtree rooted atx:right. Line 6 determines this element recursively.
To see how OS-S
ELECToperates, consider a search for the 17th smallest ele-
ment in the order-statistic tree of Figure 14.1.  We begin withxas the root, whose
key is 26, and withiD17. Since the size of 26’s left subtree is 12, its rank is 13.
Thus, we know that the node with rank 17 is the1713D4th smallest element
in 26’s right subtree. After the recursive call,xis the node with key 41, andiD4.
Since the size of 41’s left subtree is 5, its rank within its subtree is 6.  Thus, we
know that the node with rank 4 is the 4th smallest element in 41’s left subtree. Af-
ter the recursive call,xis the node with key 30, and its rank within its subtree is 2.
Thus, we recurse once again to find the42D2nd smallest element in the subtree
rooted at the node with key 38.  We now find that its left subtree has size 1, which
means it is the second smallest element.  Thus, the procedure returns a pointer to
the node with key 38.
Because each recursive call goes down one level in the order-statistic tree, the
total time for OS-S
ELECTis at worst proportional to the height of the tree.  Since
the tree is a red-black tree, its height isO.lgn/,wherenis the number of nodes.
Thus, the running time of OS-S
ELECTisO.lgn/for a dynamic set ofnelements.
Determining the rank of an element
Given a pointer to a nodexin an order-statistic treeT, the procedure OS-R
ANK
returns  the position  ofxin the linear  order  determined  by an inorder  tree  walk
ofT.

342Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
OS-RANK.T; x/
1rDx:left:sizeC1
2yDx
3whiley¤T:root
4ify
==y:p:right
5rDrCy:p:left:sizeC1
6yDy:p
7returnr
The procedure works as follows. We can think of nodex’s rank as the number of
nodes precedingxin an inorder tree walk, plus 1 forxitself. OS-R
ANKmaintains
the following loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of thewhileloop of lines 3–6,ris the rank
ofx:keyin the subtree rooted at nodey.
We use this loop invariant to show that OS-R
ANKworks correctly as follows:
Initialization:Prior to the first iteration, line 1 setsrto be the rank ofx:keywithin
the subtree rooted atx.  SettingyDxin line 2 makes the invariant true the
first time the test in line 3 executes.
Maintenance:At the end of each iteration of thewhileloop, we setyDy:p.
Thus we must show that ifris the rank ofx:keyin the subtree rooted atyat the
start of the loop body, thenris the rank ofx:keyin the subtree rooted aty:p
at the end of the loop body.  In each iteration of thewhileloop, we consider
the subtree rooted aty:p. We have already counted the number of nodes in the
subtree rooted at nodeythat precedexin an inorder walk, and so we must add
the nodes in the subtree rooted aty’s sibling that precedexin an inorder walk,
plus1fory:pif it, too, precedesx.Ifyis a left child, then neithery:pnor any
node iny:p’s right subtree precedesx,andsoweleaveralone. Otherwise,yis
a right child and all the nodes iny:p’s left subtree precedex, as doesy:pitself.
Thus, in line 5, we addy:p:left:sizeC1to the current value ofr
.
Termination:The loop terminates whenyDT:root, so that the subtree rooted
atyis the entire tree. Thus, the value ofris the rank ofx:keyin the entire tree.
As an example, when we run OS-R
ANKon the order-statistic tree of Figure 14.1
to find the rank of the node with key 38, we get the following sequence of values
ofy:keyandrat the top of thewhileloop:
iterationy:keyr
1382
2304
3414
42617

14.1Dynamic order statistics343
The procedure returns the rank 17.
Since each iteration of thewhileloop takesO.1/time, andygoes up one level in
the tree with each iteration, the running time of OS-R
ANKis at worst proportional
to the height of the tree:O.lgn/on ann-node order-statistic tree.
Maintaining subtree sizes
Given  thesizeattribute  in  each  node,  OS-S
ELECTand  OS-RANKcan  quickly
compute order-statistic information.  But unless we can efficiently maintain these
attributes within the basic modifying operations on red-black trees, our work will
have been for naught.  We shall now show how to maintain subtree sizes for both
insertion and deletion without affecting the asymptotic running time of either op-
eration.
We  noted  in  Section  13.3  that  insertion  into  a  red-black  tree  consists  of  two
phases.  The first phase goes down the tree from the root, inserting the new node
as a child of an existing node. The second phase goes up the tree, changing colors
and performing rotations to maintain the red-black properties.
To maintain the subtree sizes in the first phase, we simply incrementx:sizefor
each nodexon the simple path traversed from the root down toward the leaves. The
new node added gets asizeof 1.  Since there areO.lgn/nodes on the traversed
path, the additional cost of maintaining thesizeattributes isO.lgn/.
In the second phase, the only structural changes to the underlying red-black tree
are caused by rotations,  of which there are at most two.  Moreover,  a rotation is
a local operation:  only two nodes have theirsizeattributes invalidated.  The link
around which the rotation is performed is incident on these two nodes.  Referring
to the code for L
EFT-ROTATE.T; x/in Section 13.2, we add the following lines:
13y:sizeDx:size
14x:sizeDx:left:sizeCx:right:sizeC1
Figure  14.2  illustrates  how  the  attributes  are  updated.   The  change  to  R
IGHT-
R
OTATEis symmetric.
Since at most two rotations are performed during insertion into a red-black tree,
we spend onlyO.1/additional time updatingsizeattributes in the second phase.
Thus,  the  total  time  for  insertion  into  ann-node  order-statistic  tree  isO.lgn/,
which is asymptotically the same as for an ordinary red-black tree.
Deletion  from  a red-black  tree  also  consists  of two phases:  the  first operates
on the underlying  search tree, and the second causes at most three rotations and
otherwise  performs  no  structural  changes.   (See  Section  13.4.)   The  first  phase
either removes one nodeyfrom the tree or moves upward it within the tree.  To
update the subtree sizes, we simply traverse a simple path from nodey(starting
from  its  original  position  within  the  tree)  up  to  the  root,  decrementing  thesize

344Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
LEFT-ROTATE(T,x)
RIGHT-ROTATE(T,y)
93
19
y
42
11
x
64
7
93
42
19
12
6
47
x
y
Figure 14.2Updating subtree sizes during rotations.  The link around which we rotate is incident
on the two nodes whosesizeattributes need to be updated. The updates are local, requiring only the
sizeinformation stored inx,y, and the roots of the subtrees shown as triangles.
attribute  of  each  node  on the  path.   Since this  path  has  lengthO.lgn/in  ann-
node red-black tree, the additional time spent maintainingsizeattributes in the first
phase isO.lgn/.  We handle theO.1/rotations  in the second phase of deletion
in the same manner as for insertion.  Thus, both insertion and deletion, including
maintaining thesizeattributes, takeO.lgn/time for ann-node order-statistic tree.
Exercises
14.1-1
Show  how  OS-S
ELECT.T:root; 10/operates  on  the  red-black  treeTof  Fig-
ure 14.1.
14.1-2
Show how OS-R
ANK.T; x/operates on the red-black treeTof Figure 14.1 and
the nodexwithx:keyD35.
14.1-3
Write a nonrecursive version of OS-S
ELECT.
14.1-4
Write  a  recursive  procedure  OS-K
EY-RANK.T; k/that  takes  as  input  an  order-
statistic treeTand a keykand returns the rank ofkin the dynamic set represented
byT. Assume that the keys ofTare distinct.
14.1-5
Given an elementxin ann-node order-statistic tree and a natural numberi,how
can we determine theith successor ofxin the linear order of the tree inO.lgn/
time?

14.2How to augment a data structure345
14.1-6
Observe  that  whenever  we  reference  thesizeattribute  of  a  node  in  either  OS-
S
ELECTor OS-RANK, we use it only to compute a rank.  Accordingly,  suppose
we store in each node its rank in the subtree of which it is the root.  Show how to
maintain this information during insertion and deletion. (Remember that these two
operations can cause rotations.)
14.1-7
Show  how  to  use  an  order-statistic  tree  to  count  the  number  of  inversions  (see
Problem 2-4) in an array of sizenin timeO.nlgn/.
14.1-8?
Considernchords on a circle, each defined by its endpoints. Describe anO.nlgn/-
time algorithm to determine the number of pairs of chords that intersect inside the
circle.  (For example, if thenchords are all diameters that meet at the center, then
the correct answer is

n
2

.) Assume that no two chords share an endpoint.
14.2  How to augment a data structure
The process of augmenting a basic data structure to support additional functionality
occurs quite frequently in algorithm design. We shall use it again in the next section
to design a data structure that supports operations on intervals.  In this section, we
examine the steps involved in such augmentation.  We shall also prove a theorem
that allows us to augment red-black trees easily in many cases.
We can break the process of augmenting a data structure into four steps:
1.  Choose an underlying data structure.
2.  Determine additional information to maintain in the underlying data structure.
3.  Verify that we can maintain the additional information for the basic modifying
operations on the underlying data structure.
4.  Develop new operations.
As with any prescriptive design method, you should not blindly follow the steps
in the order given.  Most design work contains an element of trial and error, and
progress on all steps usually proceeds in parallel. There is no point, for example, in
determining additional information and developing new operations (steps 2 and 4)
if we will not be able to maintain the additional information efficiently.  Neverthe-
less, this four-step method provides a good focus for your efforts in augmenting
a data  structure,  and  it  is also  a good  way to organize  the documentation  of  an
augmented data structure.

346Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
We followed these steps in Section 14.1 to design our order-statistic trees.  For
step 1,  we chose red-black  trees as the underlying  data structure.   A clue to the
suitability of red-black trees comes from their efficient support of other dynamic-
set operations on a total order, such as M
INIMUM,MAXIMUM,SUCCESSOR,and
P
REDECESSOR.
For step 2, we added thesizeattribute, in which each nodexstores the size of the
subtree rooted atx.  Generally, the additional information makes operations more
efficient.  For example, we could have implemented OS-S
ELECTand OS-RANK
using just the keys stored in the tree, but they would not have run inO.lgn/time.
Sometimes, the additional information is pointer information rather than data, as
in Exercise 14.2-1.
For step 3,  we ensured  that  insertion  and deletion  could  maintain thesizeat-
tributes while still running inO.lgn/time. Ideally, we should need to update only
a few elements of the data structure in order to maintain the additional information.
For example, if we simply stored in each node its rank in the tree, the OS-S
ELECT
and OS-RANKprocedures would run quickly, but inserting a new minimum ele-
ment would cause a change to this information in every node of the tree. When we
store subtree sizes instead, inserting a new element causes information to change
in onlyO.lgn/nodes.
For step 4, we developed the operations OS-S
ELECTand OS-RANK.  After all,
the need for new operations is why we bother to augment a data structure in the first
place.  Occasionally, rather than developing new operations, we use the additional
information to expedite existing ones, as in Exercise 14.2-1.
Augmenting red-black trees
When red-black trees underlie an augmented data structure, we can prove that in-
sertion and deletion can always efficiently maintain certain kinds of additional in-
formation, thereby making step 3 very easy. The proof of the following theorem is
similar to the argument from Section 14.1 that we can maintain thesizeattribute
for order-statistic trees.
Theorem 14.1 (Augmenting a red-black tree)
Letfbe an attribute that augments a red-black treeTofnnodes, and suppose that
the value offfor each nodexdepends on only the information in nodesx,x:left,
andx:right, possibly includingx:left:fandx:right:f.  Then, we can maintain the
values offin all nodes ofTduring insertion and deletion without asymptotically
affecting theO.lgn/performance of these operations.
ProofThe main idea of the proof is that a change to anfattribute in a nodex
propagates  only  to  ancestors  ofxin  the  tree.   That  is,  changingx:fmay  re-

14.2How to augment a data structure347
quirex:p:fto be updated, but nothing else;  updatingx:p:fmay requirex:p:p:f
to be  updated,  but  nothing  else;  and  so on  up  the  tree.   Once we have  updated
T:root:f, no other node will depend on the new value, and so the process termi-
nates.  Since the height of a red-black tree isO.lgn/, changing anfattribute in a
node costsO.lgn/time in updating all nodes that depend on the change.
Insertion of a nodexintoTconsists of two phases.  (See Section 13.3.)  The
first phase insertsxas a child of an existing nodex:p.  We can compute the value
ofx:finO.1/time since, by supposition,  it depends only on information in the
other attributes ofxitself and the information inx’s children, butx’s children are
both the sentinelT:nil.  Once we have computedx:f, the change propagates  up
the tree.  Thus, the total time for the first phase of insertion isO.lgn/. During the
second phase, the only structural changes to the tree come from rotations.  Since
only two nodes change in a rotation,  the total time for updating thefattributes
isO.lgn/per rotation.  Since the number of rotations during insertion is at most
two, the total time for insertion isO.lgn/.
Like insertion, deletion has two phases.  (See Section 13.4.)  In the first phase,
changes to the tree occur when the deleted node is removed from the tree.  If the
deleted node had two children at the time, then its successor moves into the position
of the deleted node.  Propagating the updates tofcaused by these changes costs
at mostO.lgn/, since the changes modify the tree locally. Fixing up the red-black
tree  during  the second  phase  requires  at  most  three  rotations,  and  each  rotation
requires at mostO.lgn/time to propagate the updates tof.  Thus, like insertion,
the total time for deletion isO.lgn/.
In many cases, such as maintaining thesizeattributes in order-statistic trees, the
cost of updating after a rotation isO.1/, rather than theO.lgn/derived in the proof
of Theorem 14.1. Exercise 14.2-3 gives an example.
Exercises
14.2-1
Show,  by adding  pointers  to the nodes,  how to support  each of the dynamic-set
queries M
INIMUM,MAXIMUM,SUCCESSOR,andPREDECESSORinO.1/worst-
case  time on an  augmented  order-statistic  tree.   The asymptotic  performance  of
other operations on order-statistic trees should not be affected.
14.2-2
Can we maintain the black-heights of nodes in a red-black tree as attributes in the
nodes of the tree without affecting the asymptotic performance of any of the red-
black tree operations?  Show how, or argue why not.  How about maintaining the
depths of nodes?

348Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
14.2-3?
Let ̋be an associative binary operator, and letabe an attribute maintained in each
node of a red-black tree. Suppose that we want to include in each nodexan addi-
tional attributefsuch thatx:fDx
1
:a ̋x
2
:a ̋ ̋x
m
:a,wherex
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
is the inorder listing of nodes in the subtree rooted atx. Show how to update thef
attributes inO.1/time after a rotation.  Modify your argument slightly to apply it
to thesizeattributes in order-statistic trees.
14.2-4?
We wish to augment red-black trees with an operation RB-E
NUMERATE.x;a;b/
that outputs all the keysksuch thatakbin a red-black tree rooted atx.
Describe how to implement RB-E
NUMERATEin‚.mClgn/time, wheremis the
number of keys that are output andnis the number of internal nodes in the tree.
(Hint:You do not need to add new attributes to the red-black tree.)
14.3  Interval trees
In this section, we shall augment red-black trees to support operations on dynamic
sets of intervals.  Aclosed intervalis an ordered pair of real numbersŒt
1
;t
2
, with
t
1
t
2
.   The intervalŒt
1
;t
2
represents  the set
f
t2RWt
1
tt
2
g
.Openand
half-openintervals omit both or one of the endpoints from the set, respectively. In
this section, we shall assume that intervals are closed; extending the results to open
and half-open intervals is conceptually straightforward.
Intervals are convenient for representing events that each occupy a continuous
period of time.  We might, for example, wish to query a database of time intervals
to find out what events occurred during a given interval.  The data structure in this
section provides an efficient means for maintaining such an interval database.
We can  represent  an intervalŒt
1
;t
2
as an  objecti,  with attributesi:lowDt
1
(thelow endpoint)andi:highDt
2
(thehigh endpoint).  We say that intervalsi
andi
0
overlapifi\i
0
¤;,thatis,ifi:lowi
0
:highandi
0
:lowi:high.As
Figure 14.3 shows, any two intervalsiandi
0
satisfy theinterval trichotomy;that
is, exactly one of the following three properties holds:
a.iandi
0
overlap,
b.iis to the left ofi
0
(i.e.,i:high<i
0
:low),
c.iis to the right ofi
0
(i.e.,i
0
:high<i:low).
Aninterval treeis a red-black tree that maintains a dynamic set of elements, with
each elementxcontaining an intervalx:int.  Interval trees support the following
operations:

14.3Interval trees349
iii   i
(a)
i
(b)
i
(c)
i′i′i′i′
i′
i′
Figure 14.3The interval trichotomy for two closed intervalsiandi
0
.(a)Ifiandi
0
overlap, there
are four situations; in each,i:lowi
0
:highandi
0
:lowi:high.(b)The intervals do not overlap,
andi:high<i
0
:low.(c)The intervals do not overlap, andi
0
:high<i:low.
INTERVAL-INSERT.T; x/adds  the  elementx,  whoseintattribute  is  assumed  to
contain an interval, to the interval treeT.
I
NTERVAL-DELETE.T; x/removes the elementxfrom the interval treeT.
I
NTERVAL-SEARCH.T; i /returns a pointer to an elementxin the interval treeT
such thatx:intoverlaps intervali, or a pointer to the sentinelT:nilif no such
element is in the set.
Figure 14.4 shows how an interval tree represents a set of intervals. We shall track
the four-step method from Section 14.2 as we review the design of an interval tree
and the operations that run on it.
Step 1: Underlying data structure
We choose a red-black tree in which each nodexcontains an intervalx:intand the
key ofxis the low endpoint,x:int:low, of the interval. Thus, an inorder tree walk
of the data structure lists the intervals in sorted order by low endpoint.
Step 2: Additional information
In addition to the intervals themselves, each nodexcontains a valuex:max,which
is the maximum value of any interval endpoint stored in the subtree rooted atx.
Step 3: Maintaining the information
We must verify that insertion  and deletion  takeO.lgn/time on an interval tree
ofnnodes.  We can determinex:maxgiven intervalx:intand themaxvalues of
nodex’s children:

350Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
051015202530
0
5
6
8
15
16
17
19
25
26  26
30
20
19
21
23
9
10
8
3
(a)
[0,3]
3
[6,10]
10
[5,8]
10
[8,9]
23
[15,23]
23
[16,21]
30
[17,19]
20
[26,26]
26
[19,20]
20
(b)
[25,30]
30
int
max
Figure 14.4An interval tree.(a)A set of 10 intervals, shown sorted bottom to top by left endpoint.
(b)The interval tree that represents them. Each nodexcontains an interval, shown above the dashed
line, and the maximum value of any interval endpoint in the subtree rooted atx, shown below the
dashed line. An inorder tree walk of the tree lists the nodes in sorted order by left endpoint.
x:maxDmax.x:int:high;x:left:max;x:right:max/:
Thus,  by Theorem 14.1,  insertion  and deletion  run inO.lgn/time.  In fact,  we
can update  themaxattributes  after a rotation  inO.1/time,  as Exercises  14.2-3
and 14.3-1 show.
Step 4: Developing new operations
The only new operation we need is I
NTERVAL-SEARCH.T; i /, which finds a node
in treeTwhose interval overlaps intervali. If there is no interval that overlapsiin
the tree, the procedure returns a pointer to the sentinelT:nil.

14.3Interval trees351
INTERVAL-SEARCH.T; i /
1xDT:root
2whilex¤T:nilandidoes not overlapx:int
3ifx:left¤T:nilandx:left:maxi:low
4xDx:left
5elsexDx:right
6returnx
The search for an interval that overlapsistarts withxat the root of the tree and
proceeds downward. It terminates when either it finds an overlapping interval orx
points to the sentinelT:nil. Since each iteration of the basic loop takesO.1/time,
and since the height of ann-node red-black tree isO.lgn/,theI
NTERVAL-SEARCH
procedure takesO.lgn/time.
Before we see why I
NTERVAL-SEARCHis correct, let’s examine how it works
on the interval tree in Figure 14.4. Suppose we wish to find an interval that overlaps
the intervaliDŒ22; 25. We begin withxas the root, which containsŒ16; 21and
does not overlapi.Sincex:left:maxD23is greater thani:lowD22, the loop
continues withxas the left child of the root—the node containingŒ8; 9, which also
does not overlapi. This time,x:left:maxD10is less thani:lowD22,andsothe
loop continues with the right child ofxas the newx. Because the intervalŒ15; 23
stored in this node overlapsi, the procedure returns this node.
As an example of an unsuccessful  search, suppose we wish to find an interval
that overlapsiDŒ11; 14in the interval tree of Figure 14.4.  We once again be-
gin withxas the root.  Since the root’s intervalŒ16; 21does not overlapi,and
sincex:left:maxD23is greater thani:lowD11,  we go left to the node con-
tainingŒ8; 9.IntervalŒ8; 9does not overlapi,andx:left:maxD10is less than
i:lowD11,  and so we go right.   (Note that no interval  in the left subtree  over-
lapsi
.)  IntervalŒ15; 23does not overlapi, and its left child isT:nil,soagainwe
go right, the loop terminates, and we return the sentinelT:nil.
To see why I
NTERVAL-SEARCHis correct, we must understand why it suffices
to  examine  a  single  path  from  the  root.   The  basic  idea  is  that  at  any  nodex,
ifx:intdoes  not  overlapi,  the  search  always  proceeds  in  a  safe  direction:  the
search  will definitely  find an  overlapping  interval  if  the  tree  contains  one.   The
following theorem states this property more precisely.
Theorem 14.2
Any execution of I
NTERVAL-SEARCH.T; i /either returns a node whose interval
overlapsi, or it returnsT:niland the treeTcontains no node whose interval over-
lapsi.

352Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
i
(a)(b)
i′
i′ii′
i′′
i′′
i′′
Figure 14.5Intervals in the proof of Theorem 14.2. The value ofx:left:maxis shown in each case
as a dashed line.(a)The search goes right.  No intervali
0
inx’s left subtree can overlapi.(b)The
search goes  left.   The left subtree ofxcontains  an interval that overlapsi(situation not shown),
orx’s left subtree contains an intervali
0
such thati
0
:highDx:left:max.Sinceidoes not overlapi
0
,
neither does it overlap any intervali
00
inx’s right subtree, sincei
0
:lowi
00
:low.
ProofThewhileloop of lines 2–5 terminates either whenxDT:niloriover-
lapsx:int. In the latter case, it is certainly correct to returnx. Therefore, we focus
on the former case, in which thewhileloop terminates becausexDT:nil.
We use the following invariant for thewhileloop of lines 2–5:
If treeTcontains an interval that overlapsi, then the subtree rooted atx
contains such an interval.
We use this loop invariant as follows:
Initialization:Prior to the first iteration, line 1 setsxto be the root ofT,sothat
the invariant holds.
Maintenance:Each iteration of thewhileloop executes either line 4 or line 5. We
shall show that both cases maintain the loop invariant.
If  line  5  is  executed,  then  because  of  the  branch  condition  in  line  3,  we
havex:leftDT:nil,orx:left:max<i:low.Ifx:leftDT:nil,  the  subtree
rooted  atx:leftclearly  contains  no interval  that  overlapsi,  and so settingx
tox:rightmaintains the invariant.  Suppose, therefore, thatx:left¤T:niland
x:left:max<i:low.  As Figure 14.5(a) shows, for each intervali
0
inx’s left
subtree, we have
i
0
:highx:left:max
<i:low:
By the interval trichotomy,  therefore,i
0
andido not overlap.   Thus,  the left
subtree ofxcontains  no intervals  that  overlapi,  so that settingxtox:right
maintains the invariant.

14.3Interval trees353
If, on the other hand, line 4 is executed, then we will show that the contrapos-
itive of the loop invariant  holds.   That is,  if the subtree rooted  atx:leftcon-
tains no interval overlappingi, then no interval anywhere in the tree overlapsi.
Since  line 4 is executed,  then  because  of  the  branch  condition  in line  3,  we
havex:left:maxi:low. Moreover, by definition of themaxattribute,x’s left
subtree must contain some intervali
0
such that
i
0
:highDx:left:max
i:low:
(Figure  14.5(b)  illustrates  the  situation.)   Sinceiandi
0
do  not  overlap,  and
since it is not true thati
0
:high<i:low, it follows by the interval trichotomy
thati:high<i
0
:low. Interval trees are keyed on the low endpoints of intervals,
and thus the search-tree  property  implies that for any intervali
00
inx’s right
subtree,
i:high<i
0
:low
i
00
:low:
By the interval trichotomy,iandi
00
do not overlap.  We conclude that whether
or not any interval inx’s left subtree overlapsi, settingxtox:leftmaintains
the invariant.
Termination:If the loop terminates whenxDT:nil, then the subtree rooted atx
contains  no  interval  overlappingi.   The  contrapositive  of  the  loop  invariant
implies thatTcontains no interval that overlapsi. Hence it is correct to return
xDT:nil.
Thus, the INTERVAL-SEARCHprocedure works correctly.
Exercises
14.3-1
Write pseudocode for L
EFT-ROTATEthat operates on nodes in an interval tree and
updates themaxattributes inO.1/time.
14.3-2
Rewrite the code for I
NTERVAL-SEARCHso that it works properly when all inter-
vals are open.
14.3-3
Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an intervali, returns an interval over-
lappingithat has the minimum low endpoint, orT:nilif no such interval exists.

354Chapter 14Augmenting Data Structures
14.3-4
GivenanintervaltreeTand an intervali, describe how to list all intervals inT
that overlapiinO.min.n; klgn//time, wherekis the number of intervals in the
output list.  (Hint:One simple method makes several queries, modifying the tree
between queries. A slightly more complicated method does not modify the tree.)
14.3-5
Suggest  modifications  to  the  interval-tree  procedures  to  support  the  new  opera-
tion  I
NTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY.T; i /,whereTis  an  interval  tree  andiis
an  interval.   The  operation  should  return  a  pointer  to  a  nodexinTsuch  that
x:int:lowDi:lowandx:int:highDi:high,orT:nilifTcontains no such node.
All operations,  including  I
NTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY,  should  run inO.lgn/
time on ann-node interval tree.
14.3-6
Show how to maintain  a dynamic setQof numbers that supports  the operation
M
IN-GAP,  which gives the magnitude of the difference of the two closest num-
bers inQ.  For example, ifQD
f
1; 5; 9; 15; 18; 22
g
,thenM
IN-GAP.Q/returns
1815D3,since15and18are the two closest  numbers inQ.  Make the op-
erations  I
NSERT,DELETE,SEARCH,andMIN-GAPas efficient as possible,  and
analyze their running times.
14.3-7?
VLSI  databases  commonly  represent  an  integrated  circuit  as  a  list  of  rectan-
gles.   Assume  that  each  rectangle  is  rectilinearly  oriented  (sides  parallel  to  the
x-andy-axes), so that we represent a rectangle by its minimum and maximumx-
andy-coordinates. Give anO.nlgn/-time algorithm to decide whether or not a set
ofnrectangles so represented contains two rectangles that overlap. Your algorithm
need not report all intersecting pairs, but it must report that an overlap exists if one
rectangle entirely covers another, even if the boundary lines do not intersect. (Hint:
Move a “sweep” line across the set of rectangles.)
Problems
14-1  Point of maximum overlap
Suppose  that we wish to keep track of apoint of maximum overlapin a set of
intervals—a point with the largest number of intervals in the set that overlap it.
a.Show that there will always be a point of maximum overlap that is an endpoint
of one of the segments.

Notes for Chapter 14355
b.Design  a  data  structure  that  efficiently  supports  the  operations  INTERVAL-
I
NSERT,INTERVAL-DELETE,andFIND-POM, which returns a point of max-
imum  overlap.   (Hint:Keep a red-black  tree  of  all  the  endpoints.   Associate
a value ofC1with each left endpoint, and associate a value of1with each
right endpoint.  Augment each node of the tree with some extra information to
maintain the point of maximum overlap.)
14-2  Josephus permutation
We define theJosephus problemas follows.  Suppose thatnpeople form a circle
and  that  we  are  given  a  positive  integermn.   Beginning  with  a  designated
first person, we proceed around the circle, removing everymth person. After each
person is removed, counting continues around the circle that remains. This process
continues until we have removed allnpeople.  The order in which the people are
removed from the circle defines the.n; m/-Josephus permutationof the integers
1;2;:::;n. For example, the.7; 3/-Josephus permutation ish3; 6; 2; 7; 5; 1; 4i.
a.Suppose thatmis a constant.  Describe anO.n/-time algorithm that, given an
integern, outputs the.n; m/-Josephus permutation.
b.Suppose thatmis not a constant.  Describe anO.nlgn/-time algorithm that,
given integersnandm, outputs the.n; m/-Josephus permutation.
Chapter notes
In their  book,  Preparata  and Shamos [282] describe  several  of the interval  trees
that  appear  in  the  literature,  citing  work  by  H.  Edelsbrunner  (1980)  and  E.  M.
McCreight (1981).  The book details an interval tree that, given a static database
ofnintervals,  allows us to enumerate  allkintervals  that overlap a given query
interval inO.kClgn/time.

IV  Advanced Design and Analysis Techniques

Introduction
This part covers three important techniques used in designing and analyzing effi-
cient algorithms:  dynamic programming (Chapter 15), greedy algorithms (Chap-
ter 16),  and amortized analysis  (Chapter 17).  Earlier parts have presented  other
widely applicable techniques, such as divide-and-conquer, randomization, and how
to solve recurrences. The techniques in this part are somewhat more sophisticated,
but they help us to attack many computational problems. The themes introduced in
this part will recur later in this book.
Dynamic programming typically applies to optimization problems in which we
make  a  set  of  choices  in  order  to  arrive  at  an  optimal  solution.   As  we  make
each choice,  subproblems  of the same form often arise.  Dynamic programming
is effective when a given subproblem may arise from more than one partial set of
choices; the key technique is to store the solution to each such subproblem in case it
should reappear. Chapter 15 shows how this simple idea can sometimes transform
exponential-time algorithms into polynomial-time algorithms.
Like  dynamic-programming  algorithms,  greedy  algorithms  typically  apply  to
optimization problems in which we make a set of choices in order to arrive at an
optimal solution. The idea of a greedy algorithm is to make each choice in a locally
optimal manner.  A simple example is coin-changing:  to minimize the number of
U.S. coins needed to make change for a given amount,  we can repeatedly select
the largest-denomination  coin that is not larger than the amount that remains.  A
greedy approach provides an optimal solution for many such problems much more
quickly than would a dynamic-programming approach.  We cannot always easily
tell whether a greedy approach will be effective, however.  Chapter 16 introduces

358Part IV    Advanced Design and Analysis Techniques
matroid theory, which provides a mathematical basis that can help us to show that
a greedy algorithm yields an optimal solution.
We use amortized analysis to analyze certain algorithms that perform a sequence
of similar operations.  Instead of bounding the cost of the sequence of operations
by bounding  the actual  cost  of  each operation  separately,  an amortized  analysis
provides a bound on the actual cost of the entire sequence.  One advantage of this
approach is that although some operations might be expensive, many others might
be cheap. In other words, many of the operations might run in well under the worst-
case time. Amortized analysis is not just an analysis tool, however; it is also a way
of thinking about the design of algorithms, since the design of an algorithm and the
analysis of its running time are often closely intertwined.  Chapter 17 introduces
three ways to perform an amortized analysis of an algorithm.

15Dynamic Programming
Dynamic programming, like the divide-and-conquer  method, solves problems by
combining  the solutions  to subproblems.   (“Programming”  in this context  refers
to  a  tabular  method,  not  to  writing  computer  code.)   As  we  saw  in  Chapters  2
and 4, divide-and-conquer algorithms partition the problem into disjoint subprob-
lems, solve the subproblems recursively, and then combine their solutions to solve
the original problem. In contrast, dynamic programming applies when the subprob-
lems overlap—that is, when subproblems share subsubproblems.  In this context,
a divide-and-conquer  algorithm does more work than necessary, repeatedly solv-
ing the common subsubproblems. A dynamic-programming algorithm solves each
subsubproblem just once and then saves its answer in a table, thereby avoiding the
work of recomputing the answer every time it solves each subsubproblem.
We typically apply dynamic programming tooptimization problems. Such prob-
lems can have many possible solutions.  Each solution has a value, and we wish to
find a solution  with the optimal (minimum or maximum) value.  We call such a
solutionanoptimal solution to the problem,  as opposed totheoptimal solution,
since there may be several solutions that achieve the optimal value.
When developing a dynamic-programming algorithm, we follow a sequence of
four steps:
1.  Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2.  Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3.  Compute the value of an optimal solution, typically in a bottom-up fashion.
4.  Construct an optimal solution from computed information.
Steps 1–3 form the basis of a dynamic-programming solution to a problem.  If we
need  only  the  value  of  an optimal  solution,  and  not  the  solution  itself,  then  we
can omit step 4.  When we do perform step 4, we sometimes maintain additional
information during step 3 so that we can easily construct an optimal solution.
The sections that follow use the dynamic-programming  method to solve some
optimization problems.  Section 15.1 examines the problem of cutting a rod into

360Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
rods of smaller length in way that maximizes their total value.  Section 15.2 asks
how we can multiply a chain of matrices while performing the fewest total scalar
multiplications. Given these examples of dynamic programming, Section 15.3 dis-
cusses two key characteristics that a problem must have for dynamic programming
to be a viable solution technique.  Section 15.4 then shows how to find the longest
common subsequence of two sequences via dynamic programming.  Finally, Sec-
tion 15.5 uses dynamic programming to construct binary search trees that are opti-
mal, given a known distribution of keys to be looked up.
15.1  Rod cutting
Our first example uses dynamic programming to solve a simple problem in decid-
ing where to cut steel rods. Serling Enterprises buys long steel rods and cuts them
into shorter rods, which it then sells. Each cut is free. The management of Serling
Enterprises wants to know the best way to cut up the rods.
We assume that we know, foriD1;2;:::, the pricep
i
in dollars that Serling
Enterprises charges for a rod of lengthiinches. Rod lengths are always an integral
number of inches. Figure 15.1 gives a sample price table.
Therod-cutting problemis the following.  Given a rod of lengthninches and a
table of pricesp
i
foriD1;2;:::;n, determine the maximum revenuer
n
obtain-
able by cutting up the rod and selling the pieces. Note that if the pricep
n
for a rod
of lengthnis large enough, an optimal solution may require no cutting at all.
Consider the case whennD4.  Figure 15.2 shows all the ways to cut up a rod
of4inches in length, including the way with no cuts at all.  We see that cutting a
4-inch rod into two2-inch pieces produces revenuep
2
Cp
2
D5C5D10,which
is optimal.
We can cut up a rod of lengthnin2
n1
different  ways,  since we have an in-
dependent option of cutting, or not cutting, at distanceiinches from the left end,
lengthi
1234 5  6  7  8  9 10
pricep
i
1589101717202430
Figure 15.1A sample  price  table for  rods.   Each rod of lengthiinches  earns  the  companyp
i
dollars of revenue.

15.1Rod cutting361
9
(a)
1
(b)
8
(c)(d)
(e)(f)(g)
1
(h)
111
5518
511511511
Figure 15.2The8possible  ways  of  cutting  up  a  rod  of  length4.    Above  each  piece  is  the
value  of  that  piece,  according  to  the  sample  price  chart  of  Figure  15.1.   The  optimal  strategy  is
part (c)—cutting the rod into two pieces of length2—which has total value10.
foriD1;2;:::;n1.
1
We denote a decomposition into pieces using ordinary
additive notation, so that7D2C2C3indicates that a rod of length7is cut into
three pieces—two of length2and one of length3.  If an optimal solution cuts the
rod intokpieces, for some1kn, then an optimal decomposition
nDi
1
Ci
2
CCi
k
of the rod into pieces of lengthsi
1
,i
2
, ...,i
k
provides maximum corresponding
revenue
r
n
Dp
i
1
Cp
i
2
CCp
i
k
:
For our sample problem, we can determine the optimal revenue figuresr
i
,for
iD1;2;:::;10, by inspection, with the corresponding optimal decompositions
1
If  we  required  the  pieces  to  be  cut  in  order  of  nondecreasing  size,  there  would  be  fewer  ways
to  consider.   FornD4,  we  would  consider  only5such  ways:  parts  (a),  (b),  (c),  (e),  and  (h)
in Figure 15.2.  The number of ways is called thepartition function; it is approximately equal to
e

p
2n=3
=4n
p
3.  This quantity is less than2
n1
, but still much greater than any polynomial inn.
We shall not pursue this line of inquiry further, however.

362Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
r
1
D1from solution1D1(no cuts);
r
2
D5from solution2D2(no cuts);
r
3
D8from solution3D3(no cuts);
r
4
D10from solution4D2C2;
r
5
D13from solution5D2C3;
r
6
D17from solution6D6(no cuts);
r
7
D18from solution7D1C6or7D2C2C3;
r
8
D22from solution8D2C6;
r
9
D25from solution9D3C6;
r
10
D30from solution10D10(no cuts):
More generally, we can frame the valuesr
n
forn1in terms of optimal rev-
enues from shorter rods:
r
n
Dmax.p
n
;r
1
Cr
n1
;r
2
Cr
n2
;:::;r
n1
Cr
1
/:(15.1)
The first argument,p
n
, corresponds to making no cuts at all and selling the rod of
lengthnas is. The othern1arguments to max correspond to the maximum rev-
enue obtained by making an initial cut of the rod into two pieces of sizeiandni,
for eachiD1;2;:::;n1, and then optimally cutting up those pieces further,
obtaining revenuesr
i
andr
ni
from those two pieces. Since we don’t know ahead
of time which value ofioptimizes revenue, we have to consider all possible values
foriand pick the one that maximizes revenue. We also have the option of picking
noiat all if we can obtain more revenue by selling the rod uncut.
Note that to solve the original problem of sizen, we solve smaller problems of
the same type, but of smaller sizes.  Once we make the first cut, we may consider
the two pieces as independent  instances of the rod-cutting problem.  The overall
optimal  solution  incorporates  optimal  solutions  to  the  two  related  subproblems,
maximizing revenue from each of those two pieces.  We say that the rod-cutting
problem exhibitsoptimal substructure: optimal solutions to a problem incorporate
optimal solutions to related subproblems, which we may solve independently.
In a related, but slightly simpler, way to arrange a recursive structure for the rod-
cutting problem, we view a decomposition as consisting of a first piece of lengthi
cut off the left-hand end, and then a right-hand remainder of lengthni.Only
the remainder, and not the first piece, may be further divided.  We may view every
decomposition  of a length-nrod in this way:  as a first  piece followed  by some
decomposition of the remainder.  When doing so, we can couch the solution with
no cuts at all as saying that the first piece has sizeiDnand revenuep
n
and that
the remainder has size0with corresponding revenuer
0
D0.  We thus obtain the
following simpler version of equation (15.1):
r
n
Dmax
1in
.p
i
Cr
ni
/:(15.2)

15.1Rod cutting363
In this formulation, an optimal solution embodies the solution to onlyonerelated
subproblem—the remainder—rather than two.
Recursive top-down implementation
The following procedure implements the computation implicit in equation (15.2)
in a straightforward, top-down, recursive manner.
C
UT-ROD.p; n/
1ifn
==0
2return0
3qD1
4foriD1ton
5qDmax.q; pŒi CC
UT-ROD.p; ni//
6returnq
Procedure C
UT-RODtakes as input an arraypŒ1 : : nof prices and an integern,
and it returns the maximum revenue possible for a rod of lengthn.IfnD0,no
revenue  is possible,  and so  C
UT-RODreturns0in line 2.   Line 3 initializes  the
maximum revenueqto1, so that theforloop in lines 4–5 correctly computes
qDmax
1in
.p
i
CCUT-ROD.p; ni//; line 6 then returns this value. A simple
induction  onnproves  that  this  answer  is  equal  to  the  desired  answerr
n
,using
equation (15.2).
If you were to code up C
UT-RODin your favorite programming language and run
it on your computer, you would find that once the input size becomes moderately
large, your program would take a long time to run. FornD40, you would find that
your program takes at least several minutes, and most likely more than an hour. In
fact, you would find that each time you increasenby1, your program’s running
time would approximately double.
Why  is  C
UT-RODso  inefficient?   The  problem  is  that  CUT-RODcalls  itself
recursively  over  and  over  again  with  the  same  parameter  values;  it  solves  the
same subproblems  repeatedly.   Figure  15.3 illustrates  what  happens  fornD4:
C
UT-ROD.p; n/calls  CUT-ROD.p; ni/foriD1;2;:::;n.    Equivalently,
C
UT-ROD.p; n/calls CUT-ROD.p; j /for eachjD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  When this
process unfolds recursively,  the amount of work done, as a function ofn,grows
explosively.
To analyze the running time of C
UT-ROD,letT .n/denote the total number of
calls made to C
UT-RODwhen called with its second parameter equal ton.This
expression equals the number of nodes in a subtree whose root is labelednin the
recursion tree. The count includes the initial call at its root. Thus,T.0/D1and

364Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
3
10
0
0
01
20
0
1
2
0
10
4
Figure 15.3The recursion tree showing recursive calls resulting from a call CUT-ROD.p; n/for
nD4.  Each node label gives the sizenof the corresponding  subproblem,  so that an edge from
a parent with labelsto a child with labeltcorresponds to cutting off an initial piece of sizest
and leaving a remaining subproblem of sizet.  A path from the root to a leaf corresponds to one of
the2
n1
ways of cutting up a rod of lengthn. In general, this recursion tree has2
n
nodes and2
n1
leaves.
T .n/D1C
n1
X
jD0
T.j/ :(15.3)
The initial1is for the call at the root, and the termT.j/counts the number of calls
(including recursive calls) due to the call C
UT-ROD.p; ni/,wherejDni.
As Exercise 15.1-1 asks you to show,
T .n/D2
n
;(15.4)
and so the running time of C
UT-RODis exponential inn.
In retrospect, this exponential running time is not so surprising.  C
UT-RODex-
plicitly considers all the2
n1
possible ways of cutting up a rod of lengthn.The
tree of recursive calls has2
n1
leaves, one for each possible way of cutting up the
rod.  The labels on the simple path from the root to a leaf give the sizes of each
remaining  right-hand  piece before making each cut.  That is,  the labels give the
corresponding cut points, measured from the right-hand end of the rod.
Using dynamic programming for optimal rod cutting
We now show how to convert C
UT-RODinto an efficient algorithm, using dynamic
programming.
The dynamic-programming  method works as follows.  Having observed that a
naive recursive solution is inefficient because it solves the same subproblems re-
peatedly, we arrange for each subproblem to be solved onlyonce, saving its solu-
tion. If we need to refer to this subproblem’s solution again later, we can just look it

15.1Rod cutting365
up, rather than recompute it. Dynamic programming thus uses additional memory
to save computation time; it serves an example of atime-memory trade-off.The
savings may be dramatic: an exponential-time solution may be transformed into a
polynomial-time solution.  A dynamic-programming approach runs in polynomial
time when the number ofdistinctsubproblems involved is polynomial in the input
size and we can solve each such subproblem in polynomial time.
There are usually two equivalent  ways to implement a dynamic-programming
approach. We shall illustrate both of them with our rod-cutting example.
The first approach istop-down with memoization.
2
In this approach, we write
the procedure recursively in a natural manner,  but modified to save the result of
each subproblem (usually in an array or hash table). The procedure now first checks
to see whether it has previously solved this subproblem.  If so, it returns the saved
value, saving further computation at this level; if not, the procedure computes the
value in the usual manner. We say that the recursive procedure has beenmemoized;
it “remembers” what results it has computed previously.
The second approach is thebottom-up method. This approach typically depends
on some natural notion of the “size” of a subproblem, such that solving any par-
ticular subproblem depends only on solving “smaller” subproblems.  We sort the
subproblems by size and solve them in size order, smallest first.  When solving a
particular subproblem, we have already solved all of the smaller subproblems its
solution  depends  upon,  and  we have  saved  their  solutions.   We solve  each  sub-
problem  only  once,  and  when  we  first  see  it,  we  have  already  solved  all  of  its
prerequisite subproblems.
These two approaches yield algorithms with the same asymptotic running time,
except in unusual circumstances where the top-down approach does not actually
recurse to examine all possible subproblems.  The bottom-up approach often has
much better constant factors, since it has less overhead for procedure calls.
Here is the the pseudocode for the top-down C
UT-RODprocedure, with memo-
ization added:
M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD.p; n/
1letrŒ0::nbe a new array
2foriD0ton
3rŒiD1
4returnM
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX.p;n;r/
2
This is not a misspelling.  The word really ismemoization, notmemorization.Memoizationcomes
frommemo, since the technique consists of recording a value so that we can look it up later.

366Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
MEMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX.p;n;r/
1ifrŒn0
2returnrŒn
3ifn
==0
4qD0
5elseqD1
6foriD1ton
7qDmax.q; pŒi CM
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX.p; ni; r//
8rŒnDq
9returnq
Here, the main procedure M
EMOIZED-CUT-RODinitializes a new auxiliary ar-
rayrŒ0::nwith the value1, a convenient  choice with which to denote “un-
known.”  (Known revenue values are always nonnegative.)  It then calls its helper
routine, M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX.
The procedure M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUXis just the memoized version of our
previous procedure, C
UT-ROD.  It first checks in line 1 to see whether the desired
value is already  known and,  if it is,  then line 2 returns  it.  Otherwise,  lines 3–7
compute the desired valueqin the usual manner, line 8 saves it inrŒn, and line 9
returns it.
The bottom-up version is even simpler:
B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD.p; n/
1letrŒ0::nbeanewarray
2rŒ0D0
3forjD1ton
4qD1
5foriD1toj
6qDmax.q; pŒi CrŒji/
7rŒjDq
8returnrŒn
For  the  bottom-up  dynamic-programming  approach,  B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD
uses  the  natural  ordering  of  the  subproblems:   a  problem  of  sizeiis  “smaller”
than a subproblem of sizejifi<j.  Thus, the procedure solves subproblems of
sizesjD0; 1; : : : ; n,inthatorder.
Line  1  of  procedure  B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-RODcreates  a  new  arrayrŒ0::nin
which to save the results of the subproblems, and line 2 initializesrŒ0to0,since
a rod of length0earns no revenue. Lines 3–6 solve each subproblem of sizej,for
jD1;2;:::;n, in order of increasing size. The approach used to solve a problem
of a particular sizejis the same as that used by C
UT-ROD, except that line 6 now

15.1Rod cutting367
3
0
1
2
4
Figure 15.4The subproblem  graph for the rod-cutting problem withnD4.  The vertex labels
give the sizes of the corresponding subproblems.  A directed edge.x; y/indicates that we need a
solution to subproblemywhen solving subproblemx. This graph is a reduced version of the tree of
Figure 15.3, in which all nodes with the same label are collapsed into a single vertex and all edges
go from parent to child.
directly references array entryrŒjiinstead of making a recursive call to solve
the subproblem of sizeji.  Line 7 saves inrŒjthe solution to the subproblem
of sizej. Finally, line 8 returnsrŒn, which equals the optimal valuer
n
.
The bottom-up and top-down versions have the same asymptotic running time.
The  running  time  of  procedure  B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-RODis‚.n
2
/,  due  to  its
doubly-nested  loop structure.   The number  of  iterations  of its innerforloop,  in
lines 5–6, forms an arithmetic series. The running time of its top-down counterpart,
M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD,isalso‚.n
2
/, although this running time may be a little
harder to see.  Because a recursive call to solve a previously solved subproblem
returns immediately, M
EMOIZED-CUT-RODsolves each subproblem just once.  It
solves subproblems for sizes0; 1; : : : ; n.  To solve a subproblem of sizen,thefor
loop of lines 6–7 iteratesntimes.  Thus, the total number of iterations of thisfor
loop, over all recursive calls of M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD, forms an arithmetic series,
giving  a  total  of‚.n
2
/iterations,  just  like  the  innerforloop  of  BOTTOM-UP-
C
UT-ROD. (We actually are using a form of aggregate analysis here. We shall see
aggregate analysis in detail in Section 17.1.)
Subproblem graphs
When we think about a dynamic-programming problem, we should understand the
set of subproblems involved and how subproblems depend on one another.
Thesubproblem graphfor the problem embodies exactly this information. Fig-
ure 15.4 shows the subproblem graph for the rod-cutting problem withnD4.It
is a directed graph, containing one vertex for each distinct subproblem.  The sub-

368Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
problem graph has a directed edge from the vertex for subproblemxto the vertex
for  subproblemyif determining  an optimal  solution  for  subproblemxinvolves
directly considering an optimal solution for subproblemy.  For example, the sub-
problem graph contains an edge fromxtoyif a top-down recursive procedure for
solvingxdirectly calls itself to solvey.  We can think of the subproblem  graph
as a “reduced” or “collapsed” version of the recursion tree for the top-down recur-
sive method, in which we coalesce all nodes for the same subproblem into a single
vertex and direct all edges from parent to child.
The bottom-up method for dynamic programming considers the vertices of the
subproblem  graph in such an order that we solve the subproblemsyadjacent to
a given subproblemxbefore we solve subproblemx.  (Recall from Section B.4
that the adjacency relation is not necessarily symmetric.)  Using the terminology
from Chapter 22, in a bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm, we consider the
vertices of the subproblem graph in an order that is a “reverse topological sort,” or
a “topological sort of the transpose” (see Section 22.4) of the subproblem graph. In
other words, no subproblem is considered until all of the subproblems it depends
upon have been solved.  Similarly,  using notions from the same chapter,  we can
view  the  top-down  method  (with  memoization)  for  dynamic  programming  as  a
“depth-first search” of the subproblem graph (see Section 22.3).
The size of the subproblem graphGD.V; E/can help us determine the running
time of the dynamic programming algorithm. Since we solve each subproblem just
once, the running time is the sum of the times needed to solve each subproblem.
Typically, the time to compute the solution to a subproblem is proportional to the
degree (number of outgoing edges) of the corresponding vertex in the subproblem
graph, and the number of subproblems is equal to the number of vertices in the sub-
problem graph.  In this common case, the running time of dynamic programming
is linear in the number of vertices and edges.
Reconstructing a solution
Our dynamic-programming solutions to the rod-cutting problem return the value of
an optimal solution, but they do not return an actual solution:  a list of piece sizes.
We can extend the dynamic-programming approach to record not only the optimal
valuecomputed  for  each  subproblem,  but  also  achoicethat  led  to  the  optimal
value. With this information, we can readily print an optimal solution.
Here is an extended version of B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-RODthat computes, for each
rod sizej, not only the maximum revenuer
j
, but alsos
j
, the optimal size of the
first piece to cut off:

15.1Rod cutting369
EXTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD.p; n/
1letrŒ0::nandsŒ0 : : nbe new arrays
2rŒ0D0
3forjD1ton
4qD1
5foriD1toj
6ifq<pŒiCrŒji
7qDpŒiCrŒji
8sŒj Di
9rŒjDq
10returnrands
This procedure is similar to B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD, except that it creates the ar-
raysin line 1, and it updatessŒj in line 8 to hold the optimal sizeiof the first
piece to cut off when solving a subproblem of sizej.
The  following  procedure  takes  a  price  tablepand  a  rod  sizen,  and  it  calls
E
XTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-RODto  compute  the  arraysŒ1 : : nof  optimal
first-piece sizes and then prints out the complete list of piece sizes in an optimal
decomposition of a rod of lengthn:
P
RINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION.p; n/
1.r; s/DE
XTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD.p; n/
2whilen>0
3printsŒn
4nDnsŒn
In our rod-cutting  example,  the call  E
XTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD.p; 10/
would return the following arrays:
i
012345678910
rŒi0   1   5   8   10   13   17   18   22   25   30
sŒi
012322612310
A call to P
RINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION.p; 10/would print just10, but a call with
nD7would print the cuts1and6, corresponding to the first optimal decomposi-
tion forr
7
given earlier.
Exercises
15.1-1
Show that equation (15.4) follows from equation (15.3) and the initial condition
T.0/D1.

370Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
15.1-2
Show, by means of a counterexample,  that the following “greedy” strategy does
not always determine an optimal way to cut rods.  Define thedensityof a rod of
lengthito bep
i
=i, that is,  its value per inch.  The greedy strategy for a rod of
lengthncuts off a first piece of lengthi,where1in,  having maximum
density. It then continues by applying the greedy strategy to the remaining piece of
lengthni.
15.1-3
Consider  a  modification  of  the  rod-cutting  problem  in  which,  in  addition  to  a
pricep
i
for each rod, each cut incurs a fixed cost ofc. The revenue associated with
a solution is now the sum of the prices of the pieces minus the costs of making the
cuts. Give a dynamic-programming algorithm to solve this modified problem.
15.1-4
Modify M
EMOIZED-CUT-RODto return not only the value but the actual solution,
too.
15.1-5
The  Fibonacci  numbers  are  defined  by  recurrence  (3.22).    Give  anO.n/-time
dynamic-programming algorithm to compute thenth Fibonacci number. Draw the
subproblem graph. How many vertices and edges are in the graph?
15.2  Matrix-chain multiplication
Our next example of dynamic programming is an algorithm that solves the problem
of matrix-chain multiplication.  We are given a sequence (chain)hA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
i
ofnmatrices to be multiplied, and we wish to compute the product
A
1
A
2
A
n
:(15.5)
We can evaluate the expression (15.5) using the standard algorithm for multiply-
ing pairs of matrices as a subroutine once we have parenthesized it to resolve all
ambiguities in how the matrices are multiplied together.  Matrix multiplication is
associative, and so all parenthesizations yield the same product.  A product of ma-
trices isfully parenthesizedif it is either a single matrix or the product of two fully
parenthesized  matrix  products,  surrounded  by  parentheses.   For  example,  if  the
chain of matrices ishA
1
;A
2
;A
3
;A
4
i, then we can fully parenthesize the product
A
1
A
2
A
3
A
4
in five distinct ways:

15.2Matrix-chain multiplication371
.A
1
.A
2
.A
3
A
4
/// ;
.A
1
..A
2
A
3
/A
4
// ;
..A
1
A
2
/.A
3
A
4
// ;
..A
1
.A
2
A
3
//A
4
/;
...A
1
A
2
/A
3
/A
4
/:
How we parenthesize a chain of matrices can have a dramatic impact on the cost
of evaluating the product. Consider first the cost of multiplying two matrices. The
standard  algorithm  is given by the following  pseudocode,  which generalizes  the
S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYprocedure  from  Section  4.2.   The attributesrows
andcolumnsare the numbers of rows and columns in a matrix.
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY.A; B/
1ifA:columns¤B:rows
2error“incompatible dimensions”
3elseletCbeanewA:rows	B:columnsmatrix
4foriD1toA:rows
5forjD1toB:columns
6c
ij
D0
7forkD1toA:columns
8c
ij
Dc
ij
Ca
ik
b
kj
9returnC
We can multiply two matricesAandBonly if they arecompatible: the number of
columns ofAmust equal the number of rows ofB.IfAis ap	qmatrix andBis
aq	rmatrix, the resulting matrixCis ap	rmatrix. The time to computeCis
dominated by the number of scalar multiplications in line 8, which ispqr.Inwhat
follows, we shall express costs in terms of the number of scalar multiplications.
To illustrate the different costs incurred by different parenthesizations of a matrix
product, consider the problem of a chainhA
1
;A
2
;A
3
iof three matrices.  Suppose
that the dimensions  of the matrices are10	100,100	5,and5	50,  respec-
tively.  If we multiply according to the parenthesization..A
1
A
2
/A
3
/, we perform
101005D5000scalar  multiplications  to  compute  the10	5matrix  prod-
uctA
1
A
2
, plus another10550D2500scalar multiplications to multiply this
matrix byA
3
,  for a total of 7500  scalar  multiplications.   If instead  we multiply
according to the parenthesization.A
1
.A
2
A
3
//, we perform100550D25,000
scalar multiplications to compute the100	50matrix productA
2
A
3
, plus another
1010050D50,000 scalar multiplications to multiplyA
1
by this matrix, for a
total of 75,000 scalar multiplications.  Thus, computing the product according to
the first parenthesization is10times faster.
We  state  thematrix-chain multiplication problemas  follows:  given  a  chain
hA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
iofnmatrices, where foriD1;2;:::;n, matrixA
i
has dimension

372Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
p
i1
	p
i
, fully parenthesize the productA
1
A
2
A
n
in a way that minimizes the
number of scalar multiplications.
Note that in the matrix-chain multiplication problem, we are not actually multi-
plying matrices.  Our goal is only to determine an order for multiplying matrices
that has the lowest cost.  Typically, the time invested in determining this optimal
order is more than paid for by the time saved later on when actually performing the
matrix multiplications (such as performing only 7500 scalar multiplications instead
of 75,000).
Counting the number of parenthesizations
Before solving the matrix-chain multiplication problem by dynamic programming,
let us convince ourselves that exhaustively checking all possible parenthesizations
does not yield an efficient algorithm.  Denote the number of alternative parenthe-
sizations of a sequence ofnmatrices byP .n/.WhennD1, we have just one
matrix and therefore only one way to fully parenthesize the matrix product. When
n2, a fully parenthesized matrix product is the product of two fully parenthe-
sized matrix subproducts,  and the split  between the two subproducts  may occur
between thekth and.kC1/st matrices for anykD1;2;:::;n1.  Thus, we
obtain the recurrence
P .n/D

1ifnD1;
n1
X
kD1
P.k/P.nk/ifn2:
(15.6)
Problem  12-4 asked you to show that the solution  to a similar  recurrence  is the
sequence ofCatalan numbers, which grows as.4
n
=n
3=2
/.  A simpler exercise
(see Exercise 15.2-3) is to show that the solution to the recurrence (15.6) is.2
n
/.
The number of solutions is thus exponential inn, and the brute-force method of
exhaustive search makes for a poor strategy when determining how to optimally
parenthesize a matrix chain.
Applying dynamic programming
We  shall  use  the  dynamic-programming  method  to  determine  how  to  optimally
parenthesize a matrix chain.  In so doing, we shall follow the four-step sequence
that we stated at the beginning of this chapter:
1.   Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2.   Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3.   Compute the value of an optimal solution.

15.2Matrix-chain multiplication373
4.  Construct an optimal solution from computed information.
We shall go through these steps in order, demonstrating clearly how we apply each
step to the problem.
Step 1: The structure of an optimal parenthesization
For our first step in the dynamic-programming paradigm, we find the optimal sub-
structure and then use it to construct an optimal solution to the problem from opti-
mal solutions to subproblems.  In the matrix-chain multiplication problem, we can
perform this step as follows. For convenience, let us adopt the notationA
i::j
,where
ij, for the matrix that results from evaluating the productA
i
A
iC1
A
j
.Ob-
serve that if the problem is nontrivial, i.e.,i<j, then to parenthesize the product
A
i
A
iC1
A
j
, we must split the product betweenA
k
andA
kC1
for some integerk
in the rangeik<j. That is, for some value ofk, we first compute the matrices
A
i::k
andA
kC1::j
and then multiply them together to produce the final productA
i::j
.
The cost of parenthesizing this way is the cost of computing the matrixA
i::k
,plus
the cost of computingA
kC1::j
, plus the cost of multiplying them together.
The  optimal  substructure  of  this  problem  is  as  follows.   Suppose  that  to  op-
timally  parenthesizeA
i
A
iC1
A
j
,  we split  the product  betweenA
k
andA
kC1
.
Then  the  way  we  parenthesize  the  “prefix”  subchainA
i
A
iC1
A
k
within  this
optimal parenthesization ofA
i
A
iC1
A
j
must be an optimal parenthesization of
A
i
A
iC1
A
k
. Why? If there were a less costly way to parenthesizeA
i
A
iC1
A
k
,
then  we  could  substitute  that  parenthesization  in  the  optimal  parenthesization
ofA
i
A
iC1
A
j
to produce another way to parenthesizeA
i
A
iC1
A
j
whose cost
was lower than the optimum: a contradiction. A similar observation holds for how
we parenthesize the subchainA
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
in the optimal parenthesization of
A
i
A
iC1
A
j
: it must be an optimal parenthesization ofA
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
.
Now we use our optimal substructure to show that we can construct an optimal
solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems. We have seen that
any  solution  to  a nontrivial  instance  of the  matrix-chain  multiplication  problem
requires us to split the product, and that any optimal solution contains within it op-
timal solutions to subproblem instances. Thus, we can build an optimal solution to
an instance of the matrix-chain multiplication problem by splitting the problem into
two subproblems (optimally parenthesizingA
i
A
iC1
A
k
andA
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
),
finding optimal solutions to subproblem instances, and then combining these op-
timal subproblem solutions.  We must ensure that when we search for the correct
place to split the product,  we have considered all possible places, so that we are
sure of having examined the optimal one.

374Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
Step 2: A recursive solution
Next, we define the cost of an optimal solution recursively in terms of the optimal
solutions to subproblems. For the matrix-chain multiplication problem, we pick as
our subproblems the problems of determining the minimum cost of parenthesizing
A
i
A
iC1
A
j
for1ijn.LetmŒi; j be the minimum number of scalar
multiplications needed to compute the matrixA
i::j
; for the full problem, the lowest-
cost way to computeA
1::n
would thus bemŒ1; n.
We can definemŒi; j recursively as follows.  IfiDj, the problem is trivial;
the chain consists of just one matrixA
i::i
DA
i
, so that no scalar multiplications
are necessary to compute the product.  Thus,mŒi; i D0foriD1;2;:::;n.To
computemŒi; j wheni<j,  we take advantage  of the structure  of an optimal
solution from step 1.  Let us assume that to optimally parenthesize,  we split the
productA
i
A
iC1
A
j
betweenA
k
andA
kC1
,whereik<j.  Then,mŒi; j 
equals the minimum cost for computing the subproductsA
i::k
andA
kC1::j
,plusthe
cost of multiplying these two matrices together.  Recalling that each matrixA
i
is
p
i1
	p
i
, we see that computing the matrix productA
i::k
A
kC1::j
takesp
i1
p
k
p
j
scalar multiplications. Thus, we obtain
mŒi; j DmŒi; kCmŒkC1; j Cp
i1
p
k
p
j
:
This recursive equation assumes that we know the value ofk, which we do not.
There are onlyjipossible values fork, however, namelykDi; iC1;:::;j1.
Since the optimal parenthesization must use one of these values fork, we need only
check them all to find the best. Thus, our recursive definition for the minimum cost
of parenthesizing the productA
i
A
iC1
A
j
becomes
mŒi; j D
(
0ifiDj;
min
ik<j
f
mŒi; kCmŒkC1; j Cp
i1
p
k
p
j
g
ifi<j:
(15.7)
ThemŒi; j values give the costs of optimal solutions to subproblems, but they
do not provide all the information we need to construct  an optimal solution.  To
help us do so, we definesŒi; j to be a value ofkat which we split the product
A
i
A
iC1
A
j
in an optimal parenthesization. That is,sŒi; j equals a valueksuch
thatmŒi; j DmŒi; kCmŒkC1; j Cp
i1
p
k
p
j
.
Step 3: Computing the optimal costs
At this point, we could easily write a recursive algorithm based on recurrence (15.7)
to compute the minimum costmŒ1; nfor multiplyingA
1
A
2
A
n
.Aswesawfor
the rod-cutting problem, and as we shall see in Section 15.3, this recursive algo-
rithm  takes  exponential  time,  which is no better  than  the brute-force  method of
checking each way of parenthesizing the product.

15.2    Matrix-chain multiplication375
Observe that we have relatively few distinct subproblems:  one subproblem for
each  choice  ofiandjsatisfying1ijn,or

n
2

CnD‚.n
2
/in  all.
A  recursive  algorithm  may  encounter  each  subproblem  many  times  in  different
branches  of  its recursion  tree.   This property  of  overlapping  subproblems  is the
second hallmark of when dynamic programming applies (the first hallmark being
optimal substructure).
Instead of computing the solution to recurrence (15.7) recursively, we compute
the optimal cost by using a tabular,  bottom-up approach.  (We present the corre-
sponding top-down approach using memoization in Section 15.3.)
We shall implement the tabular, bottom-up method in the procedure M
AT R I X-
C
HAIN-ORDER,  which  appears  below.   This  procedure  assumes  that  matrixA
i
has  dimensionsp
i1
	p
i
foriD1;2;:::;n.   Its  input  is  a  sequencepD
hp
0
;p
1
;:::;p
n
i,wherep:lengthDnC1.   The  procedure  uses  an  auxiliary
tablemŒ1::n;1::nfor  storing  themŒi; j costs  and  another  auxiliary  table
sŒ1::n1;2::nthat records which index ofkachieved the optimal cost in com-
putingmŒi; j . We shall use the tablesto construct an optimal solution.
In order to implement the bottom-up approach, we must determine which entries
of the table we refer to when computingmŒi; j .  Equation (15.7) shows that the
costmŒi; j of computing a matrix-chain product ofjiC1matrices depends only
on the costs of computing matrix-chain products of fewer thanjiC1matrices.
That is, forkDi; iC1;:::;j1, the matrixA
i::k
is a product ofkiC1<
jiC1matrices and the matrixA
kC1::j
is a product  ofjk<jiC1
matrices. Thus, the algorithm should fill in the tablemin a manner that corresponds
to solving the parenthesization problem on matrix chains of increasing length. For
the subproblem of optimally parenthesizing the chainA
i
A
iC1
A
j
, we consider
the subproblem size to be the lengthjiC1of the chain.
M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER.p/
1nDp:length1
2letmŒ1::n;1::nandsŒ1::n1;2::nbe new tables
3foriD1ton
4mŒi; i D0
5forlD2ton//lis the chain length
6foriD1tonlC1
7jDiCl1
8mŒi; j D1
9forkDitoj1
10qDmŒi; kCmŒkC1; j Cp
i1
p
k
p
j
11ifq<mŒi;j
12mŒi; j Dq
13sŒi; j Dk
14returnmands

376Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
A
6
A
5
A
4
A
3
A
2
A
1
000000
15,7502,6257501,0005,000
7,8754,3752,5003,500
9,3757,1255,375
11,875    10,500
15,125
1
2
3
4
5
61
2
3
4
5
6
ji
m
12345
1335
333
33
3
2
3
4
5
61
2
3
4
5
ji
s
Figure 15.5Themandstables computed by MAT R I X-CHAIN-ORDERfornD6and the follow-
ingmatrixdimensions:
matrix
A
1
A
2
A
3
A
4
A
5
A
6
dimension30	3535	1515	55	1010	2020	25
The tables are rotated so that the main diagonal runs horizontally.  Themtable uses only the main
diagonal and upper triangle, and thestable uses only the upper triangle.  The minimum number of
scalar multiplications to multiply the 6 matrices ismŒ1; 6D15,125. Of the darker entries, the pairs
that have the same shading are taken together in line 10 when computing
mŒ2; 5Dmin
8
ˆ
<
ˆ
:
mŒ2; 2CmŒ3; 5Cp
1
p
2
p
5
D0C2500C351520D13,000;
mŒ2; 3CmŒ4; 5Cp
1
p
3
p
5
D2625C1000C35520D7125 ;
mŒ2; 4CmŒ5; 5Cp
1
p
4
p
5
D4375C0C351020D11,375
D7125 :
The algorithm  first computesmŒi; i D0foriD1;2;:::;n(the minimum
costs for chains of length1) in lines 3–4. It then uses recurrence (15.7) to compute
mŒi; iC1foriD1;2;:::;n1(the minimum costs for chains of lengthlD2)
during the first execution of theforloop in lines 5–13. The second time through the
loop, it computesmŒi; iC2foriD1;2;:::;n2(the minimum costs for chains of
lengthlD3), and so forth. At each step, themŒi; j cost computed in lines 10–13
depends only on table entriesmŒi; kandmŒkC1; j already computed.
Figure  15.5  illustrates  this  procedure  on  a  chain  ofnD6matrices.   Since
we have definedmŒi; j only forij, only the portion of the tablemstrictly
above the main diagonal is used.  The figure shows the table rotated to make the
main diagonal run horizontally.  The matrix chain is listed along the bottom.  Us-
ing this layout, we can find the minimum costmŒi; j for multiplying a subchain
A
i
A
iC1
A
j
of matrices at the intersection of lines running northeast fromA
i
and

15.2Matrix-chain multiplication377
northwest fromA
j
. Each horizontal row in the table contains the entries for matrix
chains of the same length. M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDERcomputes the rows from bot-
tom to top and from left to right within each row.  It computes each entrymŒi; j 
using the productsp
i1
p
k
p
j
forkDi; iC1;:::;j1and all entries southwest
and southeast frommŒi; j .
A simple  inspection  of  the  nested  loop  structure  of  M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER
yields a running time ofO.n
3
/for the algorithm. The loops are nested three deep,
and each loop index (l,i,andk) takes on at mostn1values. Exercise 15.2-5 asks
you to show that the running time of this algorithm is in fact also.n
3
/.Theal-
gorithm requires‚.n
2
/space to store themandstables. Thus, MAT R I X-CHAIN-
O
RDERis much more efficient than the exponential-time method of enumerating
all possible parenthesizations and checking each one.
Step 4: Constructing an optimal solution
Although M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDERdetermines the optimal number of scalar mul-
tiplications needed to compute a matrix-chain product,  it does not directly show
how to multiply the matrices.  The tablesŒ1 : : n1;2::ngives us the informa-
tion we need to do so.   Each entrysŒi; j records  a value ofksuch that an op-
timal parenthesization  ofA
i
A
iC1
A
j
splits the product betweenA
k
andA
kC1
.
Thus, we know that the final matrix multiplication  in computingA
1::n
optimally
isA
1::sŒ1;n
A
sŒ1;nC1::n
.  We can determine the earlier matrix multiplications recur-
sively, sincesŒ1; sŒ1; ndetermines the last matrix multiplication when computing
A
1::sŒ1;n
andsŒsŒ1; nC1; ndetermines the last matrix multiplication when com-
putingA
sŒ1;nC1::n
.  The following recursive procedure prints an optimal parenthe-
sization ofhA
i
;A
iC1
;:::;A
j
i,giventhestable computed by MAT R I X-CHAIN-
O
RDERand the indicesiandj. The initial call PRINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS.s;1;n/
prints an optimal parenthesization ofhA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
i.
P
RINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS.s;i;j/
1ifi
==j
2print “A”
i
3elseprint “(”
4P
RINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS.s;i;sŒi;j/
5P
RINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS.s;sŒi;jC1; j /
6print “)”
In the example of Figure 15.5,  the call  P
RINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS.s;1;6/prints
the parenthesization..A
1
.A
2
A
3
//..A
4
A
5
/A
6
//.

378Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
Exercises
15.2-1
Find  an  optimal  parenthesization  of  a  matrix-chain  product  whose  sequence  of
dimensions ish5; 10; 3; 12; 5; 50; 6i.
15.2-2
Give  a  recursive  algorithm  M
AT R I X-CHAIN-MULTIPLY.A;s;i;j/that  actually
performs the optimal matrix-chain multiplication, given the sequence of matrices
hA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
i,thestable computed by MAT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER, and the in-
dicesiandj. (The initial call would be M
AT R I X-CHAIN-MULTIPLY.A;s;1;n/.)
15.2-3
Use  the  substitution  method  to  show  that  the  solution  to  the  recurrence  (15.6)
is.2
n
/.
15.2-4
Describe the subproblem graph for matrix-chain multiplication with an input chain
of lengthn.  How many vertices does it have?  How many edges does it have, and
which edges are they?
15.2-5
LetR.i; j /be  the  number  of  times  that  table  entrymŒi; j is  referenced  while
computing other table entries in a call of M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER.  Show that the
total number of references for the entire table is
n
X
iD1
n
X
jDi
R.i; j /D
n
3
n
3
:
(Hint:You may find equation (A.3) useful.)
15.2-6
Show that a full parenthesization of ann-element expression has exactlyn1pairs
of parentheses.
15.3  Elements of dynamic programming
Although we have just worked through two examples of the dynamic-programming
method, you might still be wondering just when the method applies.  From an en-
gineering perspective, when should we look for a dynamic-programming solution
to a problem?  In this section,  we examine the two key ingredients  that an opti-

15.3Elements of dynamic programming379
mization problem must have in order for dynamic programming to apply: optimal
substructure and overlapping subproblems.  We also revisit and discuss more fully
how memoization might help us take advantage of the overlapping-subproblems
property in a top-down recursive approach.
Optimal substructure
The first step in solving an optimization problem by dynamic programming is to
characterize  the structure  of an optimal solution.   Recall that a problem exhibits
optimal substructureif an optimal solution to the problem contains within it opti-
mal solutions to subproblems.  Whenever a problem exhibits optimal substructure,
we have a good clue that dynamic programming might apply. (As Chapter 16 dis-
cusses,  it also might mean that a greedy strategy applies,  however.)  In dynamic
programming, we build an optimal solution to the problem from optimal solutions
to subproblems.  Consequently, we must take care to ensure that the range of sub-
problems we consider includes those used in an optimal solution.
We discovered optimal substructure in both of the problems we have examined
in this chapter so far.  In Section 15.1, we observed that the optimal way of cut-
ting up a rod of lengthn(if we make any cuts at all) involves optimally cutting
up the two pieces resulting from the first cut.  In Section 15.2, we observed that
an optimal  parenthesization  ofA
i
A
iC1
A
j
that  splits the product  betweenA
k
andA
kC1
contains  within it optimal solutions  to the problems of parenthesizing
A
i
A
iC1
A
k
andA
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
.
You will find yourself following a common pattern in discovering optimal sub-
structure:
1.  You show that a solution to the problem consists of making a choice, such as
choosing an initial cut in a rod or choosing an index at which to split the matrix
chain. Making this choice leaves one or more subproblems to be solved.
2.  You suppose that for a given problem, you are given the choice that leads to an
optimal solution.  You do not concern yourself yet with how to determine this
choice. You just assume that it has been given to you.
3.  Given this choice,  you determine  which subproblems  ensue  and how to best
characterize the resulting space of subproblems.
4.  You show that the solutions to the subproblems used within an optimal solution
to the problem  must themselves  be optimal  by using a “cut-and-paste”  tech-
nique.   You do so by supposing  that each of the subproblem  solutions  is not
optimal and then deriving a contradiction.   In particular,  by “cutting out” the
nonoptimal solution to each subproblem and “pasting in” the optimal one, you
show that you can get a better solution to the original problem, thus contradict-
ing your supposition  that you already had an optimal solution.  If an optimal

380Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
solution gives rise to more than one subproblem, they are typically so similar
that you can modify the cut-and-paste argument for one to apply to the others
with little effort.
To characterize the space of subproblems,  a good rule of thumb says to try to
keep the space as simple as possible and then expand it as necessary. For example,
the space of subproblems that we considered for the rod-cutting problem contained
the problems of optimally cutting up a rod of lengthifor each sizei.  This sub-
problem space worked well, and we had no need to try a more general space of
subproblems.
Conversely,  suppose  that  we had  tried  to  constrain  our  subproblem  space  for
matrix-chain multiplication to matrix products of the formA
1
A
2
A
j
. As before,
an optimal parenthesization must split this product betweenA
k
andA
kC1
for some
1k<j. Unless we could guarantee thatkalways equalsj1, we would find
that we had subproblems of the formA
1
A
2
A
k
andA
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
,andthat
the latter subproblem is not of the formA
1
A
2
A
j
. For this problem, we needed
to allow our subproblems to vary at “both ends,” that is, to allow bothiandjto
vary in the subproblemA
i
A
iC1
A
j
.
Optimal substructure varies across problem domains in two ways:
1.   how many subproblems an optimal solution to the original problem uses, and
2.   how many choices we have in determining which subproblem(s)  to use in an
optimal solution.
In  the  rod-cutting  problem,  an  optimal  solution  for  cutting  up  a  rod  of  sizen
uses just  one subproblem  (of  sizeni),  but  we must  considernchoices  fori
in  order  to determine  which  one  yields  an  optimal  solution.   Matrix-chain  mul-
tiplication  for  the  subchainA
i
A
iC1
A
j
serves  as  an  example  with  two  sub-
problems andjichoices.  For a given matrixA
k
at which we split the prod-
uct, we have two subproblems—parenthesizingA
i
A
iC1
A
k
and parenthesizing
A
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
—and we must solvebothof them optimally. Once we determine
the optimal solutions to subproblems, we choose from amongjicandidates for
the indexk.
Informally, the running time of a dynamic-programming algorithm depends on
the  product  of  two  factors:   the  number  of  subproblems  overall  and  how  many
choices we look at for each subproblem. In rod cutting, we had‚.n/subproblems
overall, and at mostnchoices to examine for each, yielding anO.n
2
/running time.
Matrix-chain multiplication had‚.n
2
/subproblems overall, and in each we had at
mostn1choices, giving anO.n
3
/running time (actually, a‚.n
3
/running time,
by Exercise 15.2-5).
Usually,  the  subproblem  graph  gives  an  alternative  way  to  perform  the  same
analysis.   Each  vertex  corresponds  to  a  subproblem,  and  the  choices  for  a  sub-

15.3Elements of dynamic programming381
problem  are  the  edges  incident  to  that  subproblem.   Recall  that  in  rod  cutting,
the subproblem graph hadnvertices and at mostnedges per vertex, yielding an
O.n
2
/running time.  For matrix-chain multiplication, if we were to draw the sub-
problem graph, it would have‚.n
2
/vertices and each vertex would have degree at
mostn1, giving a total ofO.n
3
/vertices and edges.
Dynamic programming often uses optimal substructure in a bottom-up fashion.
That is, we first find optimal solutions to subproblems and, having solved the sub-
problems,  we find an optimal solution to the problem.  Finding an optimal solu-
tion to the problem entails making a choice among subproblems as to which we
will use in solving the problem.  The cost of the problem solution is usually the
subproblem  costs  plus a cost that  is directly  attributable  to the choice  itself.   In
rod cutting, for example, first we solved the subproblems of determining optimal
ways to cut up rods of lengthiforiD0; 1; : : : ; n1, and then we determined
which such subproblem  yielded an optimal solution for a rod of lengthn,using
equation (15.2).  The cost attributable to the choice itself is the termp
i
in equa-
tion (15.2).  In matrix-chain multiplication,  we determined optimal parenthesiza-
tions of subchains ofA
i
A
iC1
A
j
, and then we chose the matrixA
k
at which to
split the product. The cost attributable to the choice itself is the termp
i1
p
k
p
j
.
In Chapter 16, we shall examine “greedy algorithms,” which have many similar-
ities to dynamic programming. In particular, problems to which greedy algorithms
apply have optimal substructure. One major difference between greedy algorithms
and dynamic programming is that instead of first finding optimal solutions to sub-
problems  and  then  making  an  informed  choice,  greedy  algorithms  first  make  a
“greedy” choice—the choice that looks best at the time—and then solve a resulting
subproblem, without bothering to solve all possible related smaller subproblems.
Surprisingly, in some cases this strategy works!
Subtleties
You should be careful not to assume that optimal substructure applies when it does
not.  Consider the following two problems in which we are given a directed graph
GD.V; E/and verticesu; 2V.
Unweighted shortest path:
3
Find  a  path  fromutoconsisting  of  the  fewest
edges.  Such a path must be simple, since removing a cycle from a path pro-
duces a path with fewer edges.
3
We use the term “unweighted” to distinguish this problem from that of finding shortest paths with
weighted  edges,  which we  shall  see  in Chapters  24  and 25.   We can  use  the  breadth-first  search
technique of Chapter 22 to solve the unweighted problem.

382Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
qr
st
Figure 15.6A  directed  graph  showing  that  the  problem  of  finding  a  longest  simple  path  in  an
unweighted directed graph does not have optimal substructure.  The pathq!r!tis a longest
simple path fromqtot, but the subpathq!ris not a longest simple path fromqtor, nor is the
subpathr!ta longest simple path fromrtot.
Unweighted longest simple path:Find a simple path fromutoconsisting of
the most edges. We need to include the requirement of simplicity because other-
wise we can traverse a cycle as many times as we like to create paths with an
arbitrarily large number of edges.
The unweighted shortest-path problem exhibits optimal substructure, as follows.
Suppose thatu¤, so that the problem is nontrivial.  Then, any pathpfromu
tomust contain an intermediate  vertex,  sayw.  (Note thatwmay beuor.)
Thus, we can decompose the pathu
p
into subpathsu
p
1
w
p
2
. Clearly, the
number of edges inpequals the number of edges inp
1
plus the number of edges
inp
2
.  We claim that ifpis an optimal (i.e., shortest) path fromuto,thenp
1
must be a shortest path fromutow.  Why?  We use a “cut-and-paste” argument:
if there were another path, sayp
0
1
, fromutowwith fewer edges thanp
1
,thenwe
could cut outp
1
and paste inp
0
1
to produce a pathu
p
0
1
w
p
2
with fewer edges
thanp, thus contradictingp’s optimality.   Symmetrically,p
2
must be a shortest
path fromwto.  Thus, we can find a shortest path fromutoby considering
all intermediate verticesw, finding a shortest path fromutowand a shortest path
fromwto, and choosing an intermediate vertexwthat yields the overall shortest
path.  In Section 25.2, we use a variant of this observation of optimal substructure
to find a shortest path between every pair of vertices on a weighted, directed graph.
You  might  be  tempted  to  assume  that  the  problem  of  finding  an  unweighted
longest simple path exhibits optimal substructure as well.  After all, if we decom-
pose a longest simple pathu
p
into subpathsu
p
1
w
p
2
, then mustn’tp
1
be a longest  simple path fromutow,  and mustn’tp
2
be a longest  simple path
fromwto?  The answer is no!  Figure 15.6 supplies an example.  Consider the
pathq!r!t, which is a longest simple path fromqtot.Isq!ra longest
simple path fromqtor?   No,  for  the pathq!s!t!risasimplepath
that is longer.  Isr!ta longest simple path fromrtot?  No again, for the path
r!q!s!tis a simple path that is longer.

15.3Elements of dynamic programming383
This example shows that for longest  simple paths,  not only does the problem
lack optimal substructure,  but we cannot necessarily assemble a “legal” solution
to the problem from solutions to subproblems.  If we combine the longest simple
pathsq!s!t!randr!q!s!t, we get the pathq!s!t!r!
q!s!t, which is not simple.  Indeed, the problem of finding an unweighted
longest simple path does not appear to have any sort of optimal substructure.  No
efficient dynamic-programming algorithm for this problem has ever been found. In
fact, this problem is NP-complete, which—as we shall see in Chapter 34—means
that we are unlikely to find a way to solve it in polynomial time.
Why is the substructure of a longest simple path so different from that of a short-
est path? Although a solution to a problem for both longest and shortest paths uses
two subproblems, the subproblems in finding the longest simple path are notinde-
pendent, whereas for shortest paths they are.  What do we mean by subproblems
being independent?  We mean that the solution to one subproblem does not affect
the solution to another subproblem of the same problem.  For the example of Fig-
ure 15.6, we have the problem of finding a longest simple path fromqtotwith two
subproblems: finding longest simple paths fromqtorand fromrtot. For the first
of these subproblems, we choose the pathq!s!t!r, and so we have also
used the verticessandt.  We can no longer use these vertices in the second sub-
problem, since the combination of the two solutions to subproblems would yield a
path that is not simple.  If we cannot use vertextin the second problem, then we
cannot solve it at all, sincetis required to be on the path that we find, and it is
not the vertex at which we are “splicing” together the subproblem solutions (that
vertex beingr).  Because we use verticessandtin one subproblem solution, we
cannot use them in the other subproblem solution. We must use at least one of them
to solve the other subproblem, however, and we must use both of them to solve it
optimally.  Thus, we say that these subproblems are not independent.  Looked at
another  way,  using  resources  in  solving  one  subproblem  (those  resources  being
vertices) renders them unavailable for the other subproblem.
Why, then,  are the subproblems  independent  for finding a shortest  path?  The
answer is that by nature, the subproblems do not share resources.  We claim that
if a vertexwis on a shortest pathpfromuto, then we can splice togetherany
shortest pathu
p
1
wandanyshortest pathw
p
2
to produce a shortest path fromu
to.  We are assured  that,  other  thanw,  no vertex can appear  in both pathsp
1
andp
2
. Why? Suppose that some vertexx¤wappears in bothp
1
andp
2
,sothat
we can decomposep
1
asu
p
ux
xwandp
2
aswx
p
x
.  By the optimal
substructure of this problem, pathphas as many edges asp
1
andp
2
together; let’s
say thatphaseedges. Now let us construct a pathp
0
Du
p
ux
x
p
x
fromuto.
Because we have excised the paths fromxtowand fromwtox, each of which
contains at least one edge, pathp
0
contains at moste2edges, which contradicts

384Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
the assumption thatpis a shortest path. Thus, we are assured that the subproblems
for the shortest-path problem are independent.
Both problems examined in Sections 15.1 and 15.2 have independent subprob-
lems.  In matrix-chain multiplication,  the subproblems are multiplying subchains
A
i
A
iC1
A
k
andA
kC1
A
kC2
A
j
.  These subchains are disjoint, so that no ma-
trix could possibly be included in both of them.  In rod cutting, to determine the
best way to cut up a rod of lengthn, we look at the best ways of cutting up rods
of lengthiforiD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  Because an optimal solution to the length-n
problem includes just one of these subproblem solutions (after we have cut off the
first piece), independence of subproblems is not an issue.
Overlapping subproblems
The second ingredient  that an optimization problem must have for dynamic pro-
gramming to apply is that the space of subproblems must be “small” in the sense
that a recursive algorithm for the problem solves the same subproblems over and
over, rather than always generating new subproblems.  Typically, the total number
of distinct subproblems is a polynomial in the input size.  When a recursive algo-
rithm revisits the same problem repeatedly, we say that the optimization problem
hasoverlapping subproblems.
4
In  contrast,  a  problem  for  which  a  divide-and-
conquer  approach is suitable usually generates  brand-new problems at each step
of the recursion.   Dynamic-programming  algorithms  typically  take advantage  of
overlapping  subproblems  by solving each subproblem  once and then storing the
solution in a table where it can be looked up when needed, using constant time per
lookup.
In  Section  15.1,  we  briefly  examined  how  a  recursive  solution  to  rod  cut-
ting  makes  exponentially  many  calls  to  find  solutions  of  smaller  subproblems.
Our dynamic-programming solution takes an exponential-time recursive algorithm
down to quadratic time.
To illustrate  the overlapping-subproblems  property  in greater detail,  let us re-
examine the matrix-chain multiplication problem.  Referring back to Figure 15.5,
observe that M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDERrepeatedly looks up the solution to subprob-
lems  in lower  rows when  solving  subproblems  in  higher  rows.   For  example,  it
references  entrymŒ3; 4four times:  during the computations  ofmŒ2; 4,mŒ1; 4,
4
It  may  seem  strange  that  dynamic  programming  relies  on  subproblems  being  both  independent
and overlapping. Although these requirements may sound contradictory, they describe two different
notions, rather than two points on the same axis.  Two subproblems of the same problem are inde-
pendent if they do not share resources. Two subproblems are overlapping if they are really the same
subproblem that occurs as a subproblem of different problems.

15.3Elements of dynamic programming385
1..4
1..12..41..23..41..34..4
2..23..42..34..41..12..23..34..41..12..31..23..3
3..34..42..23..32..23..31..12..2
Figure 15.7The  recursion  tree  for  the  computation  of  RECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN.p;1;4/.
Each node contains the parametersiandj.  The computations performed in a shaded subtree are
replaced by a single table lookup in M
EMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAIN.
mŒ3; 5,andmŒ3; 6.  If we were to recomputemŒ3; 4each time, rather than just
looking it up, the running time would increase dramatically.  To see how, consider
the following (inefficient)  recursive procedure  that determinesmŒi; j ,  the mini-
mum number of scalar multiplications needed to compute the matrix-chain product
A
i::j
DA
i
A
iC1
A
j
. The procedure is based directly on the recurrence (15.7).
R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN.p;i;j/
1ifi
==j
2return0
3mŒi; j D1
4forkDitoj1
5qDR
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN.p;i;k/
CR
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN.p; kC1; j /
Cp
i1
p
k
p
j
6ifq<mŒi;j
7mŒi; j Dq
8returnmŒi; j 
Figure 15.7 shows the recursion tree produced by the call R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-
C
HAIN.p;1;4/.   Each node  is labeled  by the values  of  the parametersiandj.
Observe that some pairs of values occur many times.
In fact, we can show that the time to computemŒ1; nby this recursive proce-
dure is at least exponential inn.LetT .n/denote the time taken by R
ECURSIVE-
M
AT R I X-CHAINto compute an optimal parenthesization of a chain ofnmatrices.
Because the execution of lines 1–2 and of lines 6–7 each take at least unit time, as

386Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
does the multiplication in line 5, inspection of the procedure yields the recurrence
T.1/1;
T .n/1C
n1
X
kD1
.T .k/CT.nk/C1/forn>1:
Noting that foriD1;2;:::;n1, each termT.i/appears once asT.k/and once
asT.nk/, and collecting then11s in the summation together with the1out
front, we can rewrite the recurrence as
T .n/2
n1
X
iD1
T.i/Cn:(15.8)
We  shall  prove  thatT .n/D.2
n
/using  the  substitution  method.   Specifi-
cally,  we shall  show  thatT .n/2
n1
for alln1.   The basis  is easy,  since
T.1/1D2
0
. Inductively, forn2we have
T .n/2
n1
X
iD1
2
i1
Cn
D2
n2
X
iD0
2
i
Cn
D2.2
n1
1/Cn(by equation (A.5))
D2
n
2Cn
2
n1
;
which completes the proof.  Thus, the total amount of work performed by the call
R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN.p;1;n/is at least exponential inn.
Compare  this  top-down,  recursive  algorithm  (without  memoization)  with  the
bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm.  The latter is more efficient because
it  takes  advantage  of  the  overlapping-subproblems  property.   Matrix-chain  mul-
tiplication  has only‚.n
2
/distinct  subproblems,  and  the  dynamic-programming
algorithm solves each exactly once.  The recursive algorithm,  on the other hand,
must again solve each subproblem  every time it reappears  in the recursion  tree.
Whenever a recursion tree for the natural recursive solution to a problem contains
the same subproblem repeatedly,  and the total number of distinct subproblems is
small, dynamic programming can improve efficiency, sometimes dramatically.

15.3Elements of dynamic programming387
Reconstructing an optimal solution
As a practical matter, we often store which choice we made in each subproblem in
a table so that we do not have to reconstruct this information from the costs that we
stored.
For matrix-chain multiplication, the tablesŒi; j saves us a significant amount of
work when reconstructing an optimal solution.  Suppose that we did not maintain
thesŒi; j table, having filled in only the tablemŒi; j containing optimal subprob-
lem costs.  We choose from amongjipossibilities when we determine which
subproblems  to  use  in  an  optimal  solution  to  parenthesizingA
i
A
iC1
A
j
,and
jiis not a constant.  Therefore, it would take‚.ji/D!.1/time to recon-
struct which subproblems we chose for a solution to a given problem.  By storing
insŒi; j the index of the matrix at which we split the productA
i
A
iC1
A
j
,we
can reconstruct each choice inO.1/time.
Memoization
As  we  saw  for  the  rod-cutting  problem,  there  is  an  alternative  approach  to  dy-
namic  programming  that  often  offers  the  efficiency  of  the  bottom-up  dynamic-
programming  approach  while  maintaining  a  top-down  strategy.   The  idea  is  to
memoizethe natural, but inefficient, recursive algorithm.  As in the bottom-up ap-
proach,  we maintain a table with subproblem solutions,  but the control structure
for filling in the table is more like the recursive algorithm.
A memoized recursive algorithm maintains an entry in a table for the solution to
each subproblem. Each table entry initially contains a special value to indicate that
the entry has yet to be filled in.  When the subproblem is first encountered as the
recursive algorithm unfolds, its solution is computed and then stored in the table.
Each subsequent time that we encounter this subproblem, we simply look up the
value stored in the table and return it.
5
Here is a memoized version of  RECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN.   Note where it
resembles the memoized top-down method for the rod-cutting problem.
5
This approach presupposes that we know the set of all possible subproblem parameters and that we
have established the relationship between table positions and subproblems.  Another, more general,
approach is to memoize by using hashing withthe subproblem parameters as keys.

388Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
MEMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAIN.p/
1nDp:length1
2letmŒ1::n;1::nbe a new table
3foriD1ton
4forjDiton
5mŒi; j D1
6returnL
OOKUP-CHAIN.m;p;1;n/
L
OOKUP-CHAIN.m;p;i;j/
1ifmŒi; j  <1
2returnmŒi; j 
3ifi
==j
4mŒi; j D0
5else forkDitoj1
6qDL
OOKUP-CHAIN.m;p;i;k/
CL
OOKUP-CHAIN.m;p;kC1; j /Cp
i1
p
k
p
j
7ifq<mŒi;j
8mŒi; j Dq
9returnmŒi; j 
The  M
EMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAINprocedure,  like  MAT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER,
maintains a tablemŒ1::n;1::nof computed values ofmŒi; j , the minimum num-
ber of scalar multiplications needed to compute the matrixA
i::j
.  Each table entry
initially contains the value1to indicate that the entry has yet to be filled in. Upon
calling L
OOKUP-CHAIN.m;p;i;j/, if line 1 finds thatmŒi; j  <1, then the pro-
cedure simply returns the previously computed costmŒi; j in line 2.  Otherwise,
the cost  is computed  as in  R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN,  stored inmŒi; j ,and
returned.  Thus,  L
OOKUP-CHAIN.m;p;i;j/always returns the value ofmŒi; j ,
but it computes it only upon the first call of L
OOKUP-CHAINwith these specific
values ofiandj.
Figure 15.7 illustrates how M
EMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAINsaves time compared
with R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN. Shaded subtrees represent values that it looks
up rather than recomputes.
Like the bottom-up dynamic-programming algorithm M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER,
the  procedure  M
EMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAINruns  inO.n
3
/time.Line  5  of
M
EMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAINexecutes‚.n
2
/times.  We can categorize the calls
of L
OOKUP-CHAINinto two types:
1.   calls in whichmŒi; j D1, so that lines 3–9 execute, and
2.   calls in whichmŒi; j  <1,sothatL
OOKUP-CHAINsimply returns in line 2.

15.3Elements of dynamic programming389
There are‚.n
2
/calls of the first type,  one per table entry.  All calls of the sec-
ond type are made as recursive calls by calls of the first type.  Whenever a given
call  of  L
OOKUP-CHAINmakes  recursive  calls,  it makesO.n/of  them.   There-
fore, there areO.n
3
/calls of the second type in all.  Each call of the second type
takesO.1/time, and each call of the first type takesO.n/time plus the time spent
in its recursive calls.  The total time, therefore, isO.n
3
/.  Memoization thus turns
an.2
n
/-time algorithm into anO.n
3
/-time algorithm.
In summary, we can solve the matrix-chain multiplication problem by either a
top-down, memoized dynamic-programming  algorithm or a bottom-up dynamic-
programming  algorithm  inO.n
3
/time.    Both  methods  take  advantage  of  the
overlapping-subproblems property.  There are only‚.n
2
/distinct subproblems in
total, and either of these methods computes the solution to each subproblem only
once.  Without memoization,  the natural recursive algorithm  runs in exponential
time, since solved subproblems are repeatedly solved.
In general practice, if all subproblems must be solved at least once, a bottom-up
dynamic-programming algorithm usually outperforms the corresponding top-down
memoized algorithm by a constant factor, because the bottom-up algorithm has no
overhead for recursion and less overhead for maintaining the table.  Moreover, for
some problems we can exploit the regular pattern of table accesses in the dynamic-
programming algorithm to reduce time or space requirements even further.  Alter-
natively, if some subproblems in the subproblem space need not be solved at all,
the memoized solution has the advantage of solving only those subproblems that
are definitely required.
Exercises
15.3-1
Which is a more efficient way to determine the optimal number of multiplications
in a matrix-chain multiplication problem: enumerating all the ways of parenthesiz-
ing the product and computing the number of multiplications for each, or running
R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN? Justify your answer.
15.3-2
Draw the recursion tree for the M
ERGE-SORTprocedure from Section 2.3.1 on an
array of16elements.  Explain why memoization fails to speed up a good divide-
and-conquer algorithm such as M
ERGE-SORT.
15.3-3
Consider a variant of the matrix-chain multiplication problem in which the goal is
to parenthesize the sequence of matrices so as to maximize, rather than minimize,

390Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
the number of scalar multiplications.  Does this problem exhibit optimal substruc-
ture?
15.3-4
As stated, in dynamic programming we first solve the subproblems and then choose
which  of them  to use in an optimal  solution  to the problem.   Professor  Capulet
claims that we do not always need to solve all the subproblems in order to find an
optimal solution.  She suggests that we can find an optimal solution to the matrix-
chain multiplication problem by always choosing the matrixA
k
at which to split
the subproductA
i
A
iC1
A
j
(by selectingkto minimize the quantityp
i1
p
k
p
j
)
beforesolving the subproblems.  Find an instance of the matrix-chain multiplica-
tion problem for which this greedy approach yields a suboptimal solution.
15.3-5
Suppose that in the rod-cutting problem of Section 15.1, we also had limitl
i
on the
number of pieces of lengthithat we are allowed to produce, foriD1;2;:::;n.
Show that the optimal-substructure  property described in Section 15.1 no longer
holds.
15.3-6
Imagine  that  you  wish  to  exchange  one  currency  for  another.   You  realize  that
instead of directly exchanging one currency for another,  you might be better off
making a series of trades through other currencies, winding up with the currency
you want. Suppose that you can tradendifferent currencies, numbered1;2;:::;n,
where you start with currency1and wish to wind up with currencyn.Youare
given,  for each pair of currenciesiandj, an exchange rater
ij
, meaning that if
you start withdunits of currencyi, you can trade fordr
ij
units of currencyj.
A sequence of trades may entail a commission, which depends on the number of
trades you make. Letc
k
be the commission that you are charged when you makek
trades. Show that, ifc
k
D0for allkD1;2;:::;n, then the problem of finding the
best sequence of exchanges from currency1to currencynexhibits optimal sub-
structure. Then show that if commissionsc
k
are arbitrary values, then the problem
of finding the best sequence of exchanges from currency1to currencyndoes not
necessarily exhibit optimal substructure.
15.4  Longest common subsequence
Biological  applications  often  need  to  compare  the  DNA  of  two  (or  more)  dif-
ferent  organisms.    A  strand  of  DNA  consists  of  a  string  of  molecules  called

15.4Longest common subsequence391
bases,  where  the  possible  bases  are  adenine,  guanine,  cytosine,  and  thymine.
Representing  each  of  these  bases  by  its  initial  letter,  we  can  express  a  strand
of  DNA  as  a  string  over  the  finite  set
f
A;C;G;T
g
.(See  Appendix  C  for
the  definition  of  a  string.)For  example,  the  DNA  of  one  organism  may  be
S
1
DACCGGTCGAGTGCGCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA, and the DNA of another organ-
ism may beS
2
DGTCGTTCGGAATGCCGTTGCTCTGTAAA.  One reason to com-
pare two strands of DNA is to determine how “similar” the two strands are, as some
measure of how closely related the two organisms are. We can, and do, define sim-
ilarity in many different ways. For example, we can say that two DNA strands are
similar if one is a substring of the other.  (Chapter 32 explores algorithms to solve
this problem.)  In our example, neitherS
1
norS
2
is a substring of the other. Alter-
natively, we could say that two strands are similar if the number of changes needed
to turn one into the other is small. (Problem 15-5 looks at this notion.) Yet another
way to measure the similarity of strandsS
1
andS
2
is by finding a third strandS
3
in which the bases  inS
3
appear  in each ofS
1
andS
2
;  these bases  must appear
in the same order, but not necessarily consecutively.  The longer the strandS
3
we
can find, the more similarS
1
andS
2
are.  In our example, the longest strandS
3
is
GTCGTCGGAAGCCGGCCGAA.
We formalize this last notion of similarity as the longest-common-subsequence
problem. A subsequence of a given sequence is just the given sequence with zero or
more elements left out. Formally, given a sequenceXDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
i, another
sequenceZDh ́
1
; ́
2
; :::;  ́
k
iis asubsequenceofXif there exists a strictly
increasing sequencehi
1
;i
2
;:::;i
k
iof indices ofXsuch that for alljD1;2;:::;k,
we havex
i
j
D ́
j
.  For example,ZDhB; C; D; Biis a subsequence  ofXD
hA; B; C; B; D; A; Biwith corresponding index sequenceh2; 3; 5; 7i.
Given two sequencesXandY,  we say that a sequenceZis acommon sub-
sequenceofXandYifZis a subsequence  of bothXandY.  For example,  if
XDhA; B; C; B; D; A; BiandYDhB; D; C; A; B; Ai, the sequencehB; C; Aiis
a common subsequence of bothXandY. The sequencehB; C; Aiis not alongest
common subsequence (LCS) ofXandY, however, since it has length3and the
sequencehB; C; B; Ai, which is also common to bothXandY, has length4.The
sequencehB; C; B; Aiis an LCS ofXandY, as is the sequencehB; D; A; Bi,
sinceXandYhave no common subsequence of length5or greater.
In  thelongest-common-subsequence problem,  we  are  given  two  sequences
XDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
iandYDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
iandwishtofindamaximum-
length common subsequence ofXandY.  This section shows how to efficiently
solve the LCS problem using dynamic programming.

392Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
Step 1: Characterizing a longest common subsequence
In a brute-force  approach  to solving  the LCS problem,  we would enumerate  all
subsequences ofXand check each subsequence to see whether it is also a subse-
quence ofY, keeping track of the longest subsequence we find. Each subsequence
ofXcorresponds to a subset of the indices
f
1;2;:::;m
g
ofX. BecauseXhas2
m
subsequences,  this approach requires exponential time, making it impractical for
long sequences.
The LCS problem has an optimal-substructure property, however, as the follow-
ing  theorem  shows.   As we shall  see,  the  natural  classes  of  subproblems  corre-
spond  to pairs of  “prefixes” of  the two input  sequences.   To be precise,  given a
sequenceXDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
i,wedefinetheithprefixofX,foriD0; 1; : : : ; m,
asX
i
Dhx
1
;x
2
; :::; x
i
i.   For example,  ifXDhA; B; C; B; D; A; Bi,then
X
4
DhA; B; C; BiandX
0
is the empty sequence.
Theorem 15.1 (Optimal substructure of an LCS)
LetXDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
iandYDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
ibe sequences, and letZD
h ́
1
; ́
2
;:::; ́
k
ibe any LCS ofXandY.
1.   Ifx
m
Dy
n
,then ́
k
Dx
m
Dy
n
andZ
k1
is an LCS ofX
m1
andY
n1
.
2.   Ifx
m
¤y
n
,then ́
k
¤x
m
implies thatZis an LCS ofX
m1
andY.
3.   Ifx
m
¤y
n
,then ́
k
¤y
n
implies thatZis an LCS ofXandY
n1
.
Proof(1) If ́
k
¤x
m
, then we could appendx
m
Dy
n
toZto obtain a common
subsequence ofXandYof lengthkC1, contradicting the supposition thatZis
alongestcommon subsequence ofXandY.  Thus, we must have ́
k
Dx
m
Dy
n
.
Now, the prefixZ
k1
is a length-.k1/common subsequence ofX
m1
andY
n1
.
We  wish  to  show  that  it  is  an  LCS.   Suppose  for  the  purpose  of  contradiction
that there exists a common subsequenceWofX
m1
andY
n1
with length greater
thank1.  Then, appendingx
m
Dy
n
toWproduces a common subsequence of
XandYwhose length is greater thank, which is a contradiction.
(2) If ́
k
¤x
m
,thenZis a common subsequence ofX
m1
andY. If there were a
common subsequenceWofX
m1
andYwith length greater thank,thenWwould
also be a common subsequence ofX
m
andY, contradicting the assumption thatZ
is an LCS ofXandY.
(3) The proof is symmetric to (2).
The way that Theorem 15.1 characterizes  longest  common subsequences  tells
us that an LCS of two sequences contains within it an LCS of prefixes of the two
sequences.  Thus, the LCS problem has an optimal-substructure property. A recur-

15.4Longest common subsequence393
sive solution also has the overlapping-subproblems property, as we shall see in a
moment.
Step 2: A recursive solution
Theorem 15.1 implies that we should examine either one or two subproblems when
finding an LCS ofXDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
iandYDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
i.Ifx
m
Dy
n
,
we must find an LCS ofX
m1
andY
n1
.  Appendingx
m
Dy
n
to this LCS yields
an LCS ofXandY.Ifx
m
¤y
n
, then we must solve two subproblems: finding an
LCS ofX
m1
andYand finding an LCS ofXandY
n1
.  Whichever of these two
LCSs is longer is an LCS ofXandY. Because these cases exhaust all possibilities,
we know that one of the optimal subproblem solutions must appear within an LCS
ofXandY.
We can readily see the overlapping-subproblems property in the LCS problem.
To  fi nd  an  L C S  ofXandY, we may need to find the LCSs ofXandY
n1
and
ofX
m1
andY.  But each of these subproblems has the subsubproblem of finding
an LCS ofX
m1
andY
n1
. Many other subproblems share subsubproblems.
As in the matrix-chain multiplication problem, our recursive solution to the LCS
problem  involves  establishing  a recurrence  for the value of  an optimal  solution.
Let us definecŒi; j to be the length of an LCS of the sequencesX
i
andY
j
.If
eitheriD0orjD0,  one of the sequences has length 0, and so the LCS has
length 0. The optimal substructure of the LCS problem gives the recursive formula
cŒi; j D

0ifiD0orjD0;
cŒi1; j1C1ifi; j > 0andx
i
Dy
j
;
max.cŒi; j1; cŒi1; j /ifi; j > 0andx
i
¤y
j
:
(15.9)
Observe that in this recursive formulation, a condition in the problem restricts
which subproblems we may consider. Whenx
i
Dy
j
, we can and should consider
the subproblem of finding an LCS ofX
i1
andY
j1
.  Otherwise, we instead con-
sider the two subproblems of finding an LCS ofX
i
andY
j1
and ofX
i1
andY
j
.In
the previous dynamic-programming algorithms we have examined—for rod cutting
and matrix-chain multiplication—we ruled out no subproblems due to conditions
in the problem.  Finding an LCS is not the only dynamic-programming algorithm
that rules out subproblems based on conditions in the problem.  For example, the
edit-distance problem (see Problem 15-5) has this characteristic.
Step 3: Computing the length of an LCS
Based on equation (15.9), we could easily write an exponential-time recursive al-
gorithm to compute the length of an LCS of two sequences. Since the LCS problem

394Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
has only‚.mn/distinct subproblems, however, we can use dynamic programming
to compute the solutions bottom up.
Procedure  LCS-L
ENGTHtakes  two  sequencesXDhx
1
;x
2
; :::; x
m
iand
YDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
ias inputs. It stores thecŒi; j values in a tablecŒ0::m;0::n,
and it computes the entries inrow-majororder.  (That is, the procedure fills in the
first row ofcfrom left to right, then the second row, and so on.) The procedure also
maintains the tablebŒ1::m;1::nto help us construct an optimal solution.  Intu-
itively,bŒi; j points to the table entry corresponding  to the optimal subproblem
solution chosen when computingcŒi; j . The procedure returns thebandctables;
cŒm; ncontains the length of an LCS ofXandY.
LCS-L
ENGTH.X; Y /
1mDX:length
2nDY:length
3letbŒ1::m;1::nandcŒ0::m;0::nbe new tables
4foriD1tom
5cŒi; 0D0
6forjD0ton
7cŒ0; j D0
8foriD1tom
9forjD1ton
10ifx
i
==y
j
11cŒi; j DcŒi1; j1C1
12bŒi; j D“-”
13elseifcŒi1; j cŒi; j1
14cŒi; j DcŒi1; j 
15bŒi; j D“"”
16elsecŒi; j DcŒi; j1
17bŒi; j D“ ”
18returncandb
Figure 15.8 shows the tables produced by LCS-L
ENGTHon the sequencesXD
hA; B; C; B; D; A; BiandYDhB; D; C; A; B; Ai.  The running time of the
procedure is‚.mn/, since each table entry takes‚.1/time to compute.
Step 4: Constructing an LCS
Thebtable returned by LCS-L
ENGTHenables us to quickly construct an LCS of
XDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
iandYDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
i. We simply begin atbŒm; nand
trace through the table by following the arrows. Whenever we encounter a “-”in
entrybŒi; j , it implies thatx
i
Dy
j
is an element of the LCS that LCS-LENGTH

15.4Longest common subsequence395
0000000
0000111
011122
011222
011223
0122233
012233
0122344
1
2
3
4
BDCAB A
1234560
A
B
C
B
D
A
B
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
j
i
x
i
y
j
Figure 15.8Thecandbtables computed by LCS-LENGTHon the sequencesXDhA; B; C; B;
D; A; BiandYDhB; D; C; A; B; Ai. The square in rowiand columnjcontains the value ofcŒi; j 
and the appropriate arrow for the value ofbŒi; j .Theentry4incŒ7; 6—the lower right-hand corner
of the table—is the length of an LCShB; C; B; AiofXandY.Fori; j  > 0,entrycŒi; j depends
only on whetherx
i
Dy
j
and the values in entriescŒi1; j ,cŒi; j1,andcŒi1; j1,which
are computed beforecŒi; j .  To reconstruct the elements of an LCS, follow thebŒi; j arrows from
the lower right-hand corner; the sequence is shaded. Each “-” on the shaded sequence corresponds
to an entry (highlighted) for whichx
i
Dy
j
isamemberofanLCS.
found.  With this method, we encounter the elements of this LCS in reverse order.
The following recursive procedure prints out an LCS ofXandYin the proper,
forward order. The initial call is P
RINT-LCS.b;X;X:length;Y:length/.
P
RINT-LCS.b;X;i;j/
1ifi
==0orj==0
2return
3ifbŒi; j 
==“-”
4P
RINT-LCS.b;X;i1; j1/
5printx
i
6elseifbŒi; j ==“"”
7P
RINT-LCS.b;X;i1; j /
8elseP
RINT-LCS.b;X;i;j1/
For thebtable in Figure 15.8, this procedure printsBCBA.  The procedure takes
timeO.mCn/, since it decrements at least one ofiandjin each recursive call.

396Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
Improving the code
Once you have developed an algorithm, you will often find that you can improve
on the time or space it uses.   Some changes  can simplify the code and improve
constant factors but otherwise yield no asymptotic improvement in performance.
Others can yield substantial asymptotic savings in time and space.
In the LCS algorithm, for example, we can eliminate thebtable altogether. Each
cŒi; j entry depends on only three otherctable entries:cŒi1; j1,cŒi1; j ,
andcŒi; j1. Given the value ofcŒi; j , we can determine inO.1/time which of
these three values was used to computecŒi; j , without inspecting tableb. Thus, we
can reconstruct an LCS inO.mCn/time using a procedure similar to P
RINT-LCS.
(Exercise 15.4-2 asks you to give the pseudocode.) Although we save‚.mn/space
by this method,  the auxiliary space requirement for computing an LCS does not
asymptotically decrease, since we need‚.mn/space for thectable anyway.
We can, however, reduce the asymptotic space requirements for LCS-L
ENGTH,
since it needs only two rows of tablecat a time: the row being computed and the
previous row. (In fact, as Exercise 15.4-4 asks you to show, we can use only slightly
more  than  the  space  for  one  row  ofcto  compute  the  length  of  an  LCS.)   This
improvement works if we need only the length of an LCS; if we need to reconstruct
the elements  of  an LCS, the smaller  table  does not  keep  enough  information  to
retrace our steps inO.mCn/time.
Exercises
15.4-1
Determine an LCS ofh1; 0; 0; 1; 0; 1; 0; 1iandh0; 1; 0; 1; 1; 0; 1; 1; 0i.
15.4-2
Give pseudocode to reconstruct an LCS from the completedctable and the original
sequencesXDhx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
m
iandYDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
n
iinO.mCn/time,
without using thebtable.
15.4-3
Give a memoized version of LCS-L
ENGTHthat runs inO.mn/time.
15.4-4
Show how to compute the length of an LCS using only2min.m; n/entries in thec
table plusO.1/additional space.  Then show how to do the same thing, but using
min.m; n/entries plusO.1/additional space.

15.5Optimal binary search trees397
15.4-5
Give anO.n
2
/-time algorithm to find the longest monotonically increasing subse-
quence of a sequence ofnnumbers.
15.4-6?
Give anO.nlgn/-time algorithm to find the longest monotonically increasing sub-
sequence of a sequence ofnnumbers.  (Hint:Observe that the last element of a
candidate subsequence of lengthiis at least as large as the last element of a can-
didate subsequence of lengthi1.  Maintain candidate subsequences by linking
them through the input sequence.)
15.5  Optimal binary search trees
Suppose that we are designing a program to translate text from English to French.
For each occurrence of each English word in the text, we need to look up its French
equivalent. We could perform these lookup operations by building a binary search
tree withnEnglish words as keys and their French equivalents  as satellite data.
Because we will search the tree for each individual word in the text, we want the
total time spent searching to be as low as possible.  We could ensure anO.lgn/
search time per occurrence by using a red-black tree or any other balanced binary
search tree.  Words appear with different frequencies,  however,  and a frequently
used word such asthemay appear far from the root while a rarely used word such
asmachicolationappears near the root. Such an organization would slow down the
translation, since the number of nodes visited when searching for a key in a binary
search  tree  equals  one  plus  the depth  of  the node  containing  the  key.   We want
words that occur frequently  in the text to be placed nearer the root.
6
Moreover,
some words in the text might have no French translation,
7
and such words would
not appear in the binary search tree at all. How do we organize a binary search tree
so as to minimize the number of nodes visited in all searches, given that we know
how often each word occurs?
What we need is known as anoptimal binary search tree.   Formally,  we are
given a sequenceKDhk
1
;k
2
;:::;k
n
iofndistinct keys in sorted order (so that
k
1
<k
2
<<k
n
), and we wish to build a binary search tree from these keys.
For  each  keyk
i
,  we  have  a  probabilityp
i
that  a  search  will  be  fork
i
.Some
searches may be for values not inK, and so we also havenC1“dummy keys”
6
If the subject of the text is castle architecture, we might wantmachicolationto appear near the root.
7
Ye s ,machicolationhas a French counterpart:mˆachicoulis.

398Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
k
2
k
1
k
4
k
3
k
5
d
0
d
1
d
2
d
3
d
4
d
5
(a)
k
2
k
1
k
4
k
3
k
5
d
0
d
1
d
2
d
3
d
4
d
5
(b)
Figure 15.9Two binary search trees for a set ofnD5keys with the following probabilities:
i
012345
p
i
0.150.100.050.100.20
q
i
0.050.100.050.050.050.10
(a)A binary search tree with expected search cost 2.80.(b)A binary search tree with expected search
cost 2.75. This tree is optimal.
d
0
;d
1
;d
2
;:::;d
n
representing values not inK. In particular,d
0
represents all val-
ues less thank
1
,d
n
represents all values greater thank
n
,andforiD1;2;:::;n1,
the dummy keyd
i
represents  all values betweenk
i
andk
iC1
.  For each dummy
keyd
i
, we have a probabilityq
i
that a search will correspond tod
i
.  Figure 15.9
shows two binary search trees for a set ofnD5keys.  Each keyk
i
is an internal
node, and each dummy keyd
i
is a leaf.  Every search is either successful (finding
some keyk
i
) or unsuccessful (finding some dummy keyd
i
),andsowehave
n
X
iD1
p
i
C
n
X
iD0
q
i
D1:(15.10)
Because we have probabilities  of searches for each key and each dummy key,
we can determine the expected cost of a search in a given binary search treeT.Let
us assume that the actual cost of a search equals the number of nodes examined,
i.e., the depth of the node found by the search inT, plus 1. Then the expected cost
of a search inTis
EŒsearch cost inTD
n
X
iD1
.depth
T
.k
i
/C1/p
i
C
n
X
iD0
.depth
T
.d
i
/C1/q
i
D1C
n
X
iD1
depth
T
.k
i
/p
i
C
n
X
iD0
depth
T
.d
i
/q
i
;(15.11)

15.5Optimal binary search trees399
where depth
T
denotes a node’s depth in the treeT. The last equality follows from
equation (15.10). In Figure 15.9(a), we can calculate the expected search cost node
by node:
nodedepthprobabilitycontribution
k
1
10.150.30
k
2
00.100.10
k
3
20.050.15
k
4
10.100.20
k
5
20.200.60
d
0
20.050.15
d
1
20.100.30
d
2
30.050.20
d
3
30.050.20
d
4
30.050.20
d
5
30.100.40
Tot al2. 80
For a given set of probabilities, we wish to construct a binary search tree whose
expected search cost is smallest. We call such a tree anoptimal binary search tree.
Figure 15.9(b) shows an optimal binary search tree for the probabilities  given in
the figure caption; its expected cost is 2.75.  This example shows that an optimal
binary search tree is not necessarily a tree whose overall height is smallest.  Nor
can we necessarily construct an optimal binary search tree by always putting the
key with the greatest probability at the root.  Here, keyk
5
has the greatest search
probability of any key, yet the root of the optimal binary search tree shown isk
2
.
(The lowest expected cost of any binary search tree withk
5
at the root is 2.85.)
As with matrix-chain multiplication, exhaustive checking of all possibilities fails
to yield an efficient algorithm.  We can label the nodes of anyn-node binary tree
with the keysk
1
;k
2
;:::;k
n
to construct a binary search tree, and then add in the
dummy keys as leaves.  In Problem 12-4, we saw that the number of binary trees
withnnodes  is.4
n
=n
3=2
/,  and  so  we  would  have  to  examine  an  exponential
number of binary search trees in an exhaustive search.  Not surprisingly, we shall
solve this problem with dynamic programming.
Step 1: The structure of an optimal binary search tree
To characterize  the optimal substructure  of optimal binary search trees,  we start
with an observation about subtrees.  Consider any subtree of a binary search tree.
It must contain keys in a contiguous rangek
i
;:::;k
j
,forsome1ijn.
In addition, a subtree that contains keysk
i
;:::;k
j
must also have as its leaves the
dummy keysd
i1
;:::;d
j
.
Now we can state the optimal substructure:  if an optimal binary search treeT
has a subtreeT
0
containing keysk
i
;:::;k
j
, then this subtreeT
0
must be optimal as

400Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
well for the subproblem with keysk
i
;:::;k
j
and dummy keysd
i1
;:::;d
j
.The
usual cut-and-paste argument applies.  If there were a subtreeT
00
whose expected
cost  is  lower  than  that  ofT
0
,  then  we  could  cutT
0
out  ofTand  paste  inT
00
,
resulting in a binary search tree of lower expected cost thanT, thus contradicting
the optimality ofT.
We need to use the optimal substructure to show that we can construct an opti-
mal solution to the problem from optimal solutions to subproblems.  Given keys
k
i
;:::;k
j
,  one  of  these  keys,  sayk
r
(irj),  is  the  root  of  an  optimal
subtree  containing  these keys.   The left  subtree  of the rootk
r
contains  the keys
k
i
;:::;k
r1
(and dummy keysd
i1
;:::;d
r1
), and the right subtree contains the
keysk
rC1
;:::;k
j
(and dummy keysd
r
;:::;d
j
). As long as we examine all candi-
date rootsk
r
,whereirj, and we determine all optimal binary search trees
containingk
i
;:::;k
r1
and those containingk
rC1
;:::;k
j
, we are guaranteed that
we will find an optimal binary search tree.
There  is  one  detail  worth  noting  about  “empty”  subtrees.   Suppose  that  in  a
subtree with keysk
i
;:::;k
j
, we selectk
i
as the root. By the above argument,k
i
’s
left subtree contains the keysk
i
;:::;k
i1
. We interpret this sequence as containing
no keys. Bear in mind, however, that subtrees also contain dummy keys. We adopt
the convention that a subtree containing keysk
i
;:::;k
i1
has no actual keys but
does contain the single dummy keyd
i1
. Symmetrically, if we selectk
j
as the root,
thenk
j
’s right subtree contains the keysk
jC1
;:::;k
j
; this right subtree contains
no actual keys, but it does contain the dummy keyd
j
.
Step 2: A recursive solution
We are ready to define the value of an optimal solution recursively.  We pick our
subproblem  domain as finding an optimal binary search tree containing the keys
k
i
;:::;k
j
,wherei1,jn,andji1.(WhenjDi1,there
are no actual  keys;  we have just  the dummy keyd
i1
.)  Let us defineeŒi; j as
the expected cost of searching an optimal binary search tree containing the keys
k
i
;:::;k
j
. Ultimately, we wish to computeeŒ1; n.
The easy case occurs whenjDi1. Then we have just the dummy keyd
i1
.
The expected search cost iseŒi; i1Dq
i1
.
Whenji, we need to select a rootk
r
from amongk
i
;:::;k
j
andthenmakean
optimal binary search tree with keysk
i
;:::;k
r1
as its left subtree and an optimal
binary search tree with keysk
rC1
;:::;k
j
as its right subtree. What happens to the
expected search cost of a subtree when it becomes a subtree of a node? The depth
of each node in the subtree increases by 1. By equation (15.11), the expected search
cost of this subtree increases by the sum of all the probabilities in the subtree. For
a subtree with keysk
i
;:::;k
j
, let us denote this sum of probabilities as

15.5Optimal binary search trees401
w.i; j /D
j
X
lDi
p
l
C
j
X
lDi1
q
l
:(15.12)
Thus, ifk
r
is the root of an optimal subtree containing keysk
i
;:::;k
j
,wehave
eŒi; j Dp
r
C.eŒi; r1Cw.i; r1//C.eŒrC1; j Cw.rC1; j // :
Noting that
w.i; j /Dw.i; r1/Cp
r
Cw.rC1; j / ;
we rewriteeŒi; j as
eŒi; j DeŒi; r1CeŒrC1; j Cw.i; j / :(15.13)
The recursive equation (15.13) assumes that we know which nodek
r
to use as
the root.  We choose the root that gives the lowest expected search cost, giving us
our final recursive formulation:
eŒi; j D
(
q
i1
ifjDi1;
min
irj
f
eŒi; r1CeŒrC1; j Cw.i; j /
g
ifij:
(15.14)
TheeŒi; j values give the expected search costs in optimal binary search trees.
To help us keep track  of the structure  of  optimal  binary  search  trees,  we define
rootŒi; j ,for1ijn, to be the indexrfor whichk
r
is the root of an
optimal binary search tree containing keysk
i
;:::;k
j
.  Although we will see how
to compute the values ofrootŒi; j , we leave the construction of an optimal binary
search tree from these values as Exercise 15.5-1.
Step 3: Computing the expected search cost of an optimal binary search tree
At this point, you may have noticed some similarities between our characterizations
of optimal binary search trees and matrix-chain multiplication.  For both problem
domains, our subproblems consist of contiguous index subranges.  A direct, recur-
sive implementation of equation (15.14) would be as inefficient as a direct, recur-
sive matrix-chain multiplication algorithm. Instead, we store theeŒi; j values in a
tableeŒ1 : : nC1;0::n. The first index needs to run tonC1rather thannbecause
in order to have a subtree containing only the dummy keyd
n
, we need to compute
and storeeŒnC1; n.  The second index needs to start from0because in order to
have a subtree containing only the dummy keyd
0
, we need to compute and store
eŒ1; 0.  We use only the entrieseŒi; j for whichji1.  We also use a table
rootŒi; j ,  for recording  the root of the subtree  containing  keysk
i
;:::;k
j
.This
table uses only the entries for which1ijn.
We  will  need  one  other  table  for  efficiency.   Rather  than  compute  the  value
ofw.i; j /from scratch every time we are computingeŒi; j —which would take

402Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
‚.ji/additions—we store these values in a tablewŒ1 : : nC1;0::n.Forthe
base case,  we computewŒi; i1Dq
i1
for1inC1.Forji,we
compute
wŒi; j DwŒi; j1Cp
j
Cq
j
:(15.15)
Thus, we can compute the‚.n
2
/values ofwŒi; j in‚.1/time each.
The  pseudocode  that  follows  takes  as  inputs  the  probabilitiesp
1
;:::;p
n
and
q
0
;:::;q
n
and the sizen, and it returns the tableseandroot.
O
PTIMAL-BST.p;q;n/
1leteŒ1 : : nC1;0::n,wŒ1 : : nC1;0::n,
androotŒ1::n;1::nbe new tables
2foriD1tonC1
3eŒi; i1Dq
i1
4wŒi; i1Dq
i1
5forlD1ton
6foriD1tonlC1
7jDiCl1
8eŒi; j D1
9wŒi; j DwŒi; j1Cp
j
Cq
j
10forrDitoj
11tDeŒi; r1CeŒrC1; j CwŒi; j 
12ift<eŒi;j
13eŒi; j Dt
14rootŒi; j Dr
15returneandroot
From the description above and the similarity to the M
AT R I X-CHAIN-ORDERpro-
cedure in Section 15.2, you should find the operation of this procedure to be fairly
straightforward.    Theforloop  of  lines  2–4  initializes  the  values  ofeŒi; i1
andwŒi; i1.Theforloop  of  lines  5–14  then  uses  the  recurrences  (15.14)
and (15.15) to computeeŒi; j andwŒi; j for all1ijn. In the first itera-
tion, whenlD1, the loop computeseŒi; iandwŒi; iforiD1;2;:::;n. The sec-
ond iteration, withlD2, computeseŒi; iC1andwŒi; iC1foriD1;2;:::;n1,
and so forth.  The innermostforloop, in lines 10–14, tries each candidate indexr
to determine which keyk
r
to use as the root of an optimal binary search tree con-
taining  keysk
i
;:::;k
j
.Thisforloop saves  the current  value  of the  indexrin
rootŒi; j whenever it finds a better key to use as the root.
Figure 15.10 shows the tableseŒi; j ,wŒi; j ,androotŒi; j computed  by the
procedure O
PTIMAL-BST on the key distribution shown in Figure 15.9. As in the
matrix-chain multiplication example of Figure 15.5, the tables are rotated to make

15.5Optimal binary search trees403
2.75
1.75
1.25
0.90
0.45
0.05
2.00
1.20
0.70
0.40
0.10
1.30
0.60
0.25
0.05
0.90
0.30
0.05
0.50
0.050.10
e
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
5
4
3
2
1
ji
1.00
0.70
0.55
0.45
0.30
0.05
0.80
0.50
0.35
0.25
0.10
0.60
0.30
0.15
0.05
0.50
0.20
0.05
0.35
0.050.10
w
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
5
4
3
2
1
ji
2
2
2
1
1
4
2
2
2
5
4
3
5
45
root
1
2
3
4
5
5
4
3
2
1
ji
Figure 15.10The tableseŒi; j ,wŒi; j ,androotŒi; j computed by OPTIMAL-BST on the key
distribution shown in Figure 15.9. The tables are rotated so that the diagonals run horizontally.
the diagonals run horizontally.  OPTIMAL-BST computes the rows from bottom to
top and from left to right within each row.
The  O
PTIMAL-BST  procedure  takes‚.n
3
/time,  just  like  MAT R I X-CHAIN-
O
RDER.  We can easily see that its running time isO.n
3
/, since itsforloops are
nested three deep and each loop index takes on at mostnvalues. The loop indices in
O
PTIMAL-BST do not have exactly the same bounds as those in MAT R I X-CHAIN-
O
RDER, but they are within at most 1 in all directions. Thus, like MAT R I X-CHAIN-
O
RDER,theOPTIMAL-BST procedure takes.n
3
/time.
Exercises
15.5-1
Write  pseudocode  for  the  procedure  C
ONSTRUCT-OPTIMAL-BST.root/which,
given the tableroot, outputs the structure of an optimal binary search tree. For the
example in Figure 15.10, your procedure should print out the structure

404Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
k
2
is the root
k
1
is the left child ofk
2
d
0
is the left child ofk
1
d
1
is the right child ofk
1
k
5
is the right child ofk
2
k
4
is the left child ofk
5
k
3
is the left child ofk
4
d
2
is the left child ofk
3
d
3
is the right child ofk
3
d
4
is the right child ofk
4
d
5
is the right child ofk
5
corresponding to the optimal binary search tree shown in Figure 15.9(b).
15.5-2
Determine the cost and structure of an optimal binary search tree for a set ofnD7
keys with the following probabilities:
i01234567
p
i
0.040.060.080.020.100.120.14
q
i
0.060.060.060.060.050.050.050.05
15.5-3
Suppose  that  instead  of  maintaining  the  tablewŒi; j ,  we  computed  the  value
ofw.i; j /directly from equation (15.12) in line 9 of O
PTIMAL-BST and used this
computed value in line 11.  How would this change affect the asymptotic running
time of O
PTIMAL-BST?
15.5-4?
Knuth [212] has shown that there are always roots of optimal subtrees such that
rootŒi; j1rootŒi; j rootŒiC1; j for all1i<jn. Use this fact to
modify the O
PTIMAL-BST procedure to run in‚.n
2
/time.
Problems
15-1  Longest simple path in a directed acyclic graph
Suppose  that  we  are  given  a  directed  acyclic  graphGD.V; E/with  real-
valued edge weights and two distinguished verticessandt.  Describe a dynamic-
programming  approach  for  finding  a  longest  weighted  simple  path  fromstot.
What does the subproblem graph look like?  What is the efficiency of your algo-
rithm?

Problems for Chapter 15405
(a)(b)
Figure 15.11Seven points in the plane, shown on a unit grid.(a)The shortest closed tour, with
length approximately24:89. This tour is not bitonic.(b)Theshortestbitonictourforthesamesetof
points. Its length is approximately25:58.
15-2  Longest palindrome subsequence
Apalindromeis a nonempty string over some alphabet that reads the same for-
ward and backward.  Examples of palindromes are all strings of length1,civic,
racecar,andaibohphobia(fear of palindromes).
Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest palindrome that is a subsequence
of a given input string. For example, given the inputcharacter, your algorithm
should returncarac. What is the running time of your algorithm?
15-3  Bitonic euclidean traveling-salesman problem
In theeuclidean traveling-salesman problem,wearegivenasetofnpoints in
the plane, and we wish to find the shortest closed tour that connects allnpoints.
Figure 15.11(a) shows the solution to a7-point problem.  The general problem is
NP-hard,  and its solution is therefore believed to require more than polynomial
time (see Chapter 34).
J. L. Bentley has suggested that we simplify the problem by restricting our at-
tention tobitonic tours,  that  is,  tours that start  at the leftmost  point,  go strictly
rightward to the rightmost point, and then go strictly leftward back to the starting
point. Figure 15.11(b) shows the shortest bitonic tour of the same7points. In this
case, a polynomial-time algorithm is possible.
Describe anO.n
2
/-time algorithm for determining an optimal bitonic tour. You
may assume that no two points have the samex-coordinate and that all operations
on real numbers take unit time. (Hint:Scan left to right, maintaining optimal pos-
sibilities for the two parts of the tour.)
15-4  Printing neatly
Consider the problem of neatly printing a paragraph with a monospaced font (all
characters having the same width) on a printer.  The input text is a sequence ofn

406Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
words of lengthsl
1
;l
2
;:::;l
n
, measured in characters.  We want to print this para-
graph neatly on a number of lines that hold a maximum ofMcharacters each. Our
criterion of “neatness” is as follows.  If a given line contains wordsithroughj,
whereij, and we leave exactly one space between words, the number of extra
space characters at the end of the line isMjCi
P
j
kDi
l
k
, which must be
nonnegative so that the words fit on the line.  We wish to minimize the sum, over
all lines except the last, of the cubes of the numbers of extra space characters at the
ends of lines.  Give a dynamic-programming  algorithm to print a paragraph ofn
words neatly on a printer.   Analyze the running  time and space requirements  of
your algorithm.
15-5  Edit distance
In order to transform one source string of textxŒ1::mto a target stringyŒ1::n,
we can perform  various  transformation  operations.   Our goal  is,  givenxandy,
to  produce  a  series  of  transformations  that  changextoy.We  use  an  ar-
ray ́—assumed to be large enough to hold all the characters it will need—to hold
the intermediate results.  Initially, ́is empty, and at termination, we should have
 ́Œj DyŒj forjD1;2;:::;n. We maintain current indicesiintoxandjinto ́,
and the operations are allowed to alter ́and these indices.  Initially,iDjD1.
We are required to examine every character inxduring the transformation, which
means that at the end of the sequence of transformation operations, we must have
iDmC1.
We may choose from among six transformation operations:
Copya character fromxto ́by setting ́Œj DxŒiand then incrementing bothi
andj. This operation examinesxŒi.
Replacea character fromxby another characterc, by setting ́Œj Dc,andthen
incrementing bothiandj. This operation examinesxŒi.
Deletea character fromxby incrementingi
but leavingjalone.  This operation
examinesxŒi.
Insertthe charactercinto ́by setting ́Œj Dcand then incrementingj,but
leavingialone. This operation examines no characters ofx.
Twiddle(i.e., exchange) the next two characters by copying them fromxto ́but
in the opposite order; we do so by setting ́Œj DxŒiC1and ́ŒjC1DxŒi
and then settingiDiC2andjDjC2.  This operation  examinesxŒi
andxŒiC1.
Killthe remainder ofxby settingiDmC1.  This operation examines all char-
acters inxthat have not yet been examined. This operation, if performed, must
be the final operation.

Problems for Chapter 15407
As an example, one way to transform the source stringalgorithmto the target
stringaltruisticis  to  use  the  following  sequence  of  operations,  where  the
underlined characters arexŒiand ́Œj after the operation:
Operationx ́
initial stringsalgorithm
copyalgorithm     a
copyalgorithm     al
replace byt    algorithm     alt
deletealgorithm     alt
copyalgorithm     altr
insertu       algorithm     altru
inserti       algorithm     altrui
inserts       algorithm     altruis
twiddlealgorithm     altruisti
insertc       algorithm     altruistic
killalgorithmaltruistic
Note that there are several other sequences of transformation operations that trans-
formalgorithmtoaltruistic.
Each of the transformation  operations  has an associated  cost.   The cost  of  an
operation depends on the specific application, but we assume that each operation’s
cost is a constant that is known to us.  We also assume that the individual costs of
the copy and replace operations are less than the combined costs of the delete and
insert operations;  otherwise, the copy and replace operations would not be used.
The cost of a given sequence of transformation operations is the sum of the costs
of the individual operations in the sequence.  For the sequence above, the cost of
transformingalgorithmtoaltruisticis
.3cost.copy//Ccost.replace/Ccost.delete/C.4cost.insert//
Ccost.twiddle/Ccost.kill/:
a.Given two sequencesxŒ1 : : mandyŒ1::nand set of transformation-operation
costs, theedit distancefromxtoyis the cost of the least expensive operation
sequence that transformsxtoy.  Describe a dynamic-programming algorithm
that finds the edit distance fromxŒ1 : : mtoyŒ1::nand prints an optimal op-
eration  sequence.   Analyze the running  time and space requirements  of your
algorithm.
The edit-distance problem generalizes the problem of aligning two DNA sequences
(see,  for  example,  Setubal  and  Meidanis  [310,  Section  3.2]).   There  are  several
methods  for  measuring  the  similarity  of  two DNA sequences  by aligning  them.
One such method to align two sequencesxandyconsists of inserting spaces at

408Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
arbitrary locations in the two sequences (including at either end) so that the result-
ing sequencesx
0
andy
0
have the same length but do not have a space in the same
position (i.e., for no positionjare bothx
0
Œj andy
0
Œj a space). Then we assign a
“score” to each position. Positionjreceives a score as follows:

C1ifx
0
Œj Dy
0
Œj and neither is a space,

1ifx
0
Œj ¤y
0
Œj and neither is a space,

2if eitherx
0
Œj ory
0
Œj is a space.
The score for the alignment is the sum of the scores of the individual positions. For
example, given the sequencesxDGATCGGCATandyDCAATGTGAATC, one
alignment is
G ATCG GCAT
CAAT GTGAATC
-
*
++
*
+
*
+-++
*
A+under a position indicates a score ofC1for that position, a-indicates a score
of1,anda
*
indicates a score of2, so that this alignment has a total score of
612142D4.
b.Explain  how  to  cast  the  problem  of  finding  an  optimal  alignment  as  an  edit
distance problem using a subset of the transformation operations copy, replace,
delete, insert, twiddle, and kill.
15-6  Planning a company party
Professor Stewart is consulting for the president of a corporation that is planning
a company party.  The company has a hierarchical structure; that is, the supervisor
relation forms a tree rooted at the president.  The personnel office has ranked each
employee with a conviviality rating, which is a real number.  In order to make the
party fun for all attendees, the president does not want both an employee and his
or her immediate supervisor to attend.
Professor Stewart is given the tree that describes the structure of the corporation,
using the left-child,  right-sibling  representation  described in Section 10.4.  Each
node of the tree holds, in addition to the pointers,  the name of an employee and
that employee’s conviviality  ranking.  Describe an algorithm to make up a guest
list that maximizes the sum of the conviviality ratings of the guests.  Analyze the
running time of your algorithm.
15-7  Viterbi algorithm
We can use dynamic programming  on a directed  graphGD.V; E/for speech
recognition.   Each  edge.u; /2Eis  labeled  with  a  sound	.u;/from  a  fi-
nite set†of sounds.  The labeled graph is a formal model of a person speaking

Problems for Chapter 15409
a restricted  language.   Each path in the graph  starting  from a distinguished  ver-
tex
0
2Vcorresponds to a possible sequence of sounds produced by the model.
We define the label of a directed path to be the concatenation of the labels of the
edges on that path.
a.Describe an efficient algorithm that, given an edge-labeled graphGwith dis-
tinguished vertex
0
and a sequencesDh	
1
;	
2
;:::;	
k
iof sounds from†,
returns a path inGthat begins at
0
and hassas its label, if any such path exists.
Otherwise, the algorithm should return
NO-SUCH-PAT H.  Analyze the running
time of your algorithm. (Hint:You may find concepts from Chapter 22 useful.)
Now, suppose that every edge.u; /2Ehas an associated  nonnegative proba-
bilityp.u; /of traversing the edge.u; /from vertexuand thus producing the
corresponding sound. The sum of the probabilities of the edges leaving any vertex
equals1.  The probability  of a path is defined to be the product of the probabil-
ities of its edges.   We can view the probability  of  a path beginning  at
0
as the
probability  that a “random walk” beginning  at
0
will follow the specified path,
where we randomly choose which edge to take leaving a vertexuaccording to the
probabilities of the available edges leavingu.
b.Extend your answer to part (a) so that if a path is returned, it is amost prob-
able pathstarting at
0
and having labels.  Analyze the running time of your
algorithm.
15-8  Image compression by seam carving
We are given a color picture consisting of anm	narrayAŒ1 : : m; 1 : : nof pixels,
where each pixel specifies a triple of red, green, and blue (RGB) intensities.  Sup-
pose that we wish to compress this picture slightly. Specifically, we wish to remove
one pixel from each of themrows, so that the whole picture becomes one pixel
narrower.  To avoid disturbing visual effects,  however, we require that the pixels
removed in two adjacent rows be in the same or adjacent columns;  the pixels re-
moved form a “seam” from the top row to the bottom row where successive pixels
in the seam are adjacent vertically or diagonally.
a.Show that the number of such possible seams grows at least exponentially inm,
assuming thatn>1.
b.Suppose  now  that  along  with  each  pixelAŒi; j ,  we  have  calculated  a  real-
valued  disruption  measuredŒi;j,  indicating  how  disruptive  it  would  be  to
remove  pixelAŒi; j .  Intuitively,  the lower a pixel’s  disruption  measure,  the
more similar the pixel is to its neighbors.  Suppose further that we define the
disruption measure of a seam to be the sum of the disruption measures of its
pixels.

410Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
Give an  algorithm  to  find a  seam  with the  lowest  disruption  measure.   How
efficient is your algorithm?
15-9  Breaking a string
A certain string-processing  language allows a programmer to break a string into
two pieces.  Because this operation copies the string, it costsntime units to break
a string ofncharacters  into two pieces.   Suppose a programmer  wants to break
a  string  into  many  pieces.   The  order  in  which  the  breaks  occur  can  affect  the
total amount of time used.  For example,  suppose  that the programmer  wants to
break a20-character string after characters2,8,and10(numbering the characters
in ascending order from the left-hand end, starting from1).  If she programs the
breaks to occur in left-to-right order, then the first break costs20time units, the
second break costs18time units (breaking  the string from characters3to20at
character8), and the third break costs12time units, totaling50time units.  If she
programs the breaks to occur  in right-to-left  order,  however,  then the first break
costs20time units, the second break costs10time units, and the third break costs
8time units, totaling38time units.  In yet another order, she could break first at8
(costing20), then break the left piece at2(costing8), and finally the right piece
at10(costing12), for a total cost of40.
Design an algorithm that, given the numbers of characters after which to break,
determines  a  least-cost  way  to  sequence  those  breaks.   More  formally,  given  a
stringSwithncharacters and an arrayLŒ1::mcontaining the break points, com-
pute the lowest cost for a sequence of breaks, along with a sequence of breaks that
achieves this cost.
15-10  Planning an investment strategy
Your  knowledge  of  algorithms  helps  you  obtain  an  exciting  job  with  the  Acme
Computer  Company,  along with a $10,000  signing  bonus.   You decide  to invest
this money with the goal of maximizing your return at the end of10years.  You
decide to use the Amalgamated Investment Company to manage your investments.
Amalgamated Investments requires you to observe the following rules.  It offersn
different investments, numbered1throughn. In each yearj, investmentiprovides
a return rate ofr
ij
. In other words, if you investddollars in investmentiin yearj,
then at the end of yearj, you havedr
ij
dollars.  The return rates are guaranteed,
that is, you are given all the return rates for the next10years for each investment.
You make investment decisions only once per year.  At the end of each year, you
can leave the money made in the previous year in the same investments,  or you
can shift money to other investments,  by either shifting money between existing
investments  or  moving  money  to  a  new  investement.   If  you  do  not  move your
money between two consecutive years, you pay a fee off
1
dollars, whereas if you
switch your money, you pay a fee off
2
dollars, wheref
2
>f
1
.

Problems for Chapter 15411
a.The problem, as stated, allows you to invest your money in multiple investments
in  each  year.   Prove  that  there  exists  an  optimal  investment  strategy  that,  in
each year, puts all the money into a single investment.  (Recall that an optimal
investment strategy maximizes the amount of money after10years and is not
concerned with any other objectives, such as minimizing risk.)
b.Prove that the problem of planning your optimal investment strategy exhibits
optimal substructure.
c.Design an algorithm that plans your optimal investment strategy.  What is the
running time of your algorithm?
d.Suppose that Amalgamated Investments imposed the additional restriction that,
at any point, you can have no more than $15,000 in any one investment.  Show
that the problem of maximizing your income at the end of10years no longer
exhibits optimal substructure.
15-11  Inventory planning
The Rinky Dink Company makes machines that resurface ice rinks.  The demand
for such products varies from month to month, and so the company needs to de-
velop a strategy  to plan its manufacturing  given the fluctuating,  but predictable,
demand.  The company wishes to design a plan for the nextnmonths.  For each
monthi, the company knows the demandd
i
, that is, the number of machines that
it will sell.  LetDD
P
n
iD1
d
i
be the total demand over the nextnmonths.  The
company keeps a full-time staff who provide labor  to manufacture  up tomma-
chines per month. If the company needs to make more thanmmachines in a given
month, it can hire additional, part-time labor, at a cost that works out tocdollars
per machine.  Furthermore, if, at the end of a month, the company is holding any
unsold machines, it must pay inventory costs.  The cost for holdingjmachines is
given as a functionh.j /forjD1;2;:::;D,whereh.j /0for1jDand
h.j /h.jC1/for1jD1.
Give an algorithm that calculates a plan for the company that minimizes its costs
while fulfilling all the demand. The running time should be polyomial innandD.
15-12  Signing free-agent baseball players
Suppose that you are the general manager for a major-league baseball team. During
the off-season, you need to sign some free-agent players for your team.  The team
owner has given you a budget of $Xto spend on free agents.  You are allowed to
spend less than $Xaltogether, but the owner will fire you if you spend any more
than $X.

412Chapter 15Dynamic Programming
You are consideringNdifferent positions, and for each position,Pfree-agent
players who play that position are available.
8
Because you do not want to overload
your roster with too many players at any position, for each position you may sign
at most one free agent who plays that position. (If you do not sign any players at a
particular position, then you plan to stick with the players you already have at that
position.)
To determine how valuable a player is going to be, you decide to use a sabermet-
ric statistic
9
known as “VORP,” or “value over replacement player.” A player with
a higher VORP is more valuable than a player with a lower VORP. A player with a
higher VORP is not necessarily more expensive to sign than a player with a lower
VORP, because factors other than a player’s value determine how much it costs to
sign him.
For each available free-agent player, you have three pieces of information:

the player’s position,

the amount of money it will cost to sign the player, and

the player’s VORP.
Devise an algorithm that maximizes the total VORP of the players you sign while
spending no more than $Xaltogether. You may assume that each player signs for a
multiple of $100,000. Your algorithm should output the total VORP of the players
you sign,  the total amount of money you spend,  and a list of which players you
sign. Analyze the running time and space requirement of your algorithm.
Chapter notes
R. Bellman began the systematic  study  of  dynamic  programming  in 1955.   The
word “programming,” both here and in linear programming, refers to using a tab-
ular solution method. Although optimization techniques incorporating elements of
dynamic programming were known earlier, Bellman provided the area with a solid
mathematical basis [37].
8
Although there are nine positions on a baseball team,Nis not necesarily equal to9because some
general managers have particular ways of thinking about positions. For example, a general manager
might consider right-handed pitchers and left-handed pitchers to be separate “positions,” as well as
starting pitchers, long relief pitchers (relief pitchers who can pitch several innings), and short relief
pitchers (relief pitchers who normally pitch at most only one inning).
9
Sabermetricsis the application of statistical analysis to baseball records.  It provides several ways
to compare the relative values of individual players.

Notes for Chapter 15413
Galil and Park [125] classify dynamic-programming algorithms according to the
size of the table and the number of other table entries each entry depends on. They
call a dynamic-programming algorithmtD=eDif its table size isO.n
t
/and each
entry depends onO.n
e
/other entries. For example, the matrix-chain multiplication
algorithm in Section 15.2 would be2D=1D, and the longest-common-subsequence
algorithm in Section 15.4 would be2D=0D.
Hu and Shing [182, 183] give anO.nlgn/-time algorithm for the matrix-chain
multiplication problem.
TheO.mn/-time algorithm for the longest-common-subsequence  problem ap-
pears to be a folk algorithm. Knuth [70] posed the question of whether subquadratic
algorithms for the LCS problem exist.  Masek and Paterson [244] answered this
question in the affirmative by giving an algorithm that runs inO.mn=lgn/time,
wherenmand the sequences are drawn from a set of bounded size.  For the
special  case in which no element appears  more than once in an input  sequence,
Szymanski [326] shows how to solve the problem inO..nCm/lg.nCm//time.
Many  of  these  results  extend  to  the  problem  of  computing  string  edit  distances
(Problem 15-5).
An early paper on variable-length binary encodings by Gilbert and Moore [133]
had applications to constructing optimal binary search trees for the case in which all
probabilitiesp
i
are0; this paper contains anO.n
3
/-time algorithm. Aho, Hopcroft,
and Ullman [5] present the algorithm from Section 15.5. Exercise 15.5-4 is due to
Knuth [212].  Hu and Tucker [184] devised an algorithm for the case in which all
probabilitiesp
i
are0that usesO.n
2
/time andO.n/space; subsequently, Knuth
[211] reduced the time toO.nlgn/.
Problem 15-8 is due to Avidan and Shamir [27], who have posted on the Web a
wonderful video illustrating this image-compression technique.

16Greedy Algorithms
Algorithms  for optimization  problems typically  go through  a sequence  of  steps,
with a set of choices at each step. For many optimization problems, using dynamic
programming to determine the best choices is overkill; simpler, more efficient al-
gorithms will do.  Agreedy algorithmalways makes the choice that looks best at
the moment. That is, it makes a locally optimal choice in the hope that this choice
will lead to a globally optimal solution.  This chapter explores optimization prob-
lems for which greedy algorithms provide optimal solutions.  Before reading this
chapter, you should read about dynamic programming in Chapter 15, particularly
Section 15.3.
Greedy algorithms do not always yield optimal solutions, but for many problems
they do.  We shall first examine, in Section 16.1, a simple but nontrivial problem,
the activity-selection problem, for which a greedy algorithm efficiently computes
an  optimal  solution.   We  shall  arrive  at  the  greedy  algorithm  by  first  consider-
ing a dynamic-programming approach and then showing that we can always make
greedy  choices  to  arrive  at an  optimal  solution.   Section  16.2  reviews  the  basic
elements of the greedy approach, giving a direct approach for proving greedy al-
gorithms correct.  Section 16.3 presents an important application of greedy tech-
niques:  designing data-compression (Huffman) codes.  In Section 16.4, we inves-
tigate some of the theory  underlying  combinatorial  structures  called  “matroids,”
for which a greedy algorithm always produces an optimal solution.  Finally, Sec-
tion 16.5 applies matroids to solve a problem of scheduling unit-time tasks with
deadlines and penalties.
The greedy method is quite powerful and works well for a wide range of prob-
lems.  Later chapters will present many algorithms that we can view as applica-
tions of the greedy method, including minimum-spanning-tree algorithms (Chap-
ter 23), Dijkstra’s algorithm for shortest paths from a single source (Chapter 24),
and Chv ́atal’s greedy set-covering heuristic (Chapter 35). Minimum-spanning-tree
algorithms furnish a classic example of the greedy method. Although you can read

16.1An activity-selection problem415
this chapter and Chapter 23 independently of each other, you might find it useful
to read them together.
16.1  An activity-selection problem
Our first example is the problem of scheduling several competing activities that re-
quire exclusive use of a common resource, with a goal of selecting a maximum-size
set of mutually compatible activities.  Suppose we have a setSD
f
a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
g
ofnproposedactivitiesthat wish to use a resource, such as a lecture hall, which
can serve only one activity at a time. Each activitya
i
has astart times
i
and afinish
timef
i
,where0s
i
<f
i
<1.  If selected, activitya
i
takes place during the
half-open time intervalŒs
i
;f
i
/. Activitiesa
i
anda
j
arecompatibleif the intervals
Œs
i
;f
i
/andŒs
j
;f
j
/do not overlap.  That is,a
i
anda
j
are compatible ifs
i
f
j
ors
j
f
i
.Intheactivity-selection problem, we wish to select a maximum-size
subset of mutually compatible activities.  We assume that the activities are sorted
in monotonically increasing order of finish time:
f
1
f
2
f
3
f
n1
f
n
:(16.1)
(We  shall  see  later  the  advantage  that  this  assumption  provides.)   For  example,
consider the following setSof activities:
i123456 7  8  9 1011
s
i
130535 6  8  8  2 12
f
i
4567991011121416
For this example, the subset
f
a
3
;a
9
;a
11
g
consists of mutually compatible activities.
It is not a maximum subset, however, since the subset
f
a
1
;a
4
;a
8
;a
11
g
is larger. In
fact,
f
a
1
;a
4
;a
8
;a
11
g
is a largest subset of mutually compatible activities; another
largest subset is
f
a
2
;a
4
;a
9
;a
11
g
.
We  shall  solve  this  problem  in  several  steps.   We  start  by  thinking  about  a
dynamic-programming solution, in which we consider several choices when deter-
mining which subproblems to use in an optimal solution. We shall then observe that
we need to consider only one choice—the greedy choice—and that when we make
the greedy choice, only one subproblem remains. Based on these observations, we
shall develop a recursive greedy algorithm to solve the activity-scheduling  prob-
lem. We shall complete the process of developing a greedy solution by converting
the recursive algorithm to an iterative one. Although the steps we shall go through
in this section are slightly more involved than is typical when developing a greedy
algorithm, they illustrate the relationship between greedy algorithms and dynamic
programming.

416Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
The optimal substructure of the activity-selection problem
We can easily verify that the activity-selection problem exhibits optimal substruc-
ture. Let us denote byS
ij
the set of activities that start after activitya
i
finishes and
that finish before activitya
j
starts. Suppose that we wish to find a maximum set of
mutually compatible activities inS
ij
, and suppose further that such a maximum set
isA
ij
, which includes some activitya
k
. By includinga
k
in an optimal solution, we
are left with two subproblems: finding mutually compatible activities in the setS
ik
(activities that start after activitya
i
finishes and that finish before activitya
k
starts)
and finding mutually compatible activities in the setS
kj
(activities that start after
activitya
k
finishes and that finish before activitya
j
starts).  LetA
ik
DA
ij
\S
ik
andA
kj
DA
ij
\S
kj
,sothatA
ik
contains the activities inA
ij
that finish beforea
k
starts andA
kj
contains the activities inA
ij
that start aftera
k
finishes.  Thus, we
haveA
ij
DA
ik
[
f
a
k
g
[A
kj
, and so the maximum-size setA
ij
of mutually com-
patible activities inS
ij
consists of
j
A
ij
j
D
j
A
ik
j
C
j
A
kj
j
C1activities.
The usual cut-and-paste argument shows that the optimal solutionA
ij
must also
include  optimal  solutions  to the two subproblems  forS
ik
andS
kj
.   If we could
find a setA
0
kj
of mutually compatible activities inS
kj
wherejA
0
kj
j>
j
A
kj
j
,then
we could useA
0
kj
, rather thanA
kj
, in a solution to the subproblem  forS
ij
.We
would have constructed a set of
j
A
ik
j
CjA
0
kj
jC1>
j
A
ik
j
C
j
A
kj
j
C1D
j
A
ij
j
mutually  compatible  activities,  which  contradicts  the  assumption  thatA
ij
is  an
optimal solution. A symmetric argument applies to the activities inS
ik
.
This way of characterizing  optimal  substructure  suggests  that we might  solve
the activity-selection problem by dynamic programming.  If we denote the size of
an optimal solution for the setS
ij
bycŒi; j , then we would have the recurrence
cŒi; j DcŒi; kCcŒk; j C1:
Of  course,  if  we did  not  know  that  an optimal  solution  for  the  setS
ij
includes
activitya
k
,  we would have to examine all activities  inS
ij
to find which one to
choose, so that
cŒi; j D
(
0ifS
ij
D;;
max
a
k
2S
ij
f
cŒi; kCcŒk; j C1
g
ifS
ij
¤;:
(16.2)
We could then develop a recursive algorithm and memoize it, or we could work
bottom-up and fill in table entries as we go along.  But we would be overlooking
another important characteristic of the activity-selection problem that we can use
to great advantage.

16.1An activity-selection problem417
Making the greedy choice
What if we could choose an activity to add to our optimal solution without having
to first solve all the subproblems?  That could save us from having to consider all
the choices inherent in recurrence (16.2). In fact, for the activity-selection problem,
we need consider only one choice: the greedy choice.
What do we mean by the greedy choice for the activity-selection problem? Intu-
ition suggests that we should choose an activity that leaves the resource available
for as many other activities as possible.  Now, of the activities we end up choos-
ing, one of them must be the first one to finish.  Our intuition tells us, therefore,
to choose the activity inSwith the earliest finish time, since that would leave the
resource available for as many of the activities that follow it as possible.  (If more
than one activity inShas the earliest  finish time,  then we can choose any such
activity.) In other words, since the activities are sorted in monotonically increasing
order by finish time, the greedy choice is activitya
1
.  Choosing the first activity
to finish is not the only way to think of making a greedy choice for this problem;
Exercise 16.1-3 asks you to explore other possibilities.
If we make the greedy choice, we have only one remaining subproblem to solve:
finding activities that start aftera
1
finishes.  Why don’t  we have to consider  ac-
tivities that finish beforea
1
starts?  We have thats
1
<f
1
,andf
1
is the earliest
finish time of any activity, and therefore no activity can have a finish time less than
or equal tos
1
.  Thus, all activities that are compatible with activitya
1
must start
aftera
1
finishes.
Furthermore, we have already established that the activity-selection problem ex-
hibits optimal substructure. LetS
k
D
f
a
i
2SWs
i
f
k
g
be the set of activities that
start after activitya
k
finishes. If we make the greedy choice of activitya
1
,thenS
1
remains as the only subproblem to solve.
1
Optimal substructure tells us that ifa
1
is in the optimal solution, then an optimal solution to the original problem consists
of activitya
1
and all the activities in an optimal solution to the subproblemS
1
.
One big question  remains:  is our intuition  correct?   Is the greedy  choice—in
which we choose the first activity to finish—always part of some optimal solution?
The following theorem shows that it is.
1
We sometimes refer to the setsS
k
as subproblems rather than as just sets of activities. It will always
be clear from the context whether we are referring toS
k
as a set of activities or as a subproblem
whose input is that set.

418Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Theorem 16.1
Consider any nonempty subproblemS
k
,andleta
m
be an activity inS
k
with the
earliest finish time. Thena
m
is included in some maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities ofS
k
.
ProofLetA
k
be a maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities inS
k
,
and leta
j
be the activity inA
k
with the earliest finish time.  Ifa
j
Da
m
,weare
done, since we have shown thata
m
is in some maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities ofS
k
.Ifa
j
¤a
m
, let the setA
0
k
DA
k

f
a
j
g
[
f
a
m
g
beA
k
but substitutinga
m
fora
j
. The activities inA
0
k
are disjoint, which follows because
the activities inA
k
are disjoint,a
j
is the first activity inA
k
to finish, andf
m
f
j
.
Since
j
A
0
k
j
D
j
A
k
j
, we conclude thatA
0
k
is a maximum-size subset of mutually
compatible activities ofS
k
, and it includesa
m
.
Thus, we see that although we might be able to solve the activity-selection prob-
lem  with  dynamic  programming,  we  don’t  need  to.   (Besides,  we  have  not  yet
examined  whether  the activity-selection  problem  even has overlapping  subprob-
lems.)  Instead, we can repeatedly choose the activity that finishes first, keep only
the activities  compatible  with this activity,  and repeat until no activities  remain.
Moreover, because we always choose the activity with the earliest finish time, the
finish times of the activities  we choose  must strictly  increase.   We can consider
each activity just once overall, in monotonically increasing order of finish times.
An  algorithm  to  solve  the  activity-selection  problem  does  not  need  to  work
bottom-up,  like  a  table-based  dynamic-programming  algorithm.   Instead,  it  can
work top-down, choosing an activity to put into the optimal solution and then solv-
ing the subproblem of choosing activities from those that are compatible with those
already chosen.  Greedy algorithms typically have this top-down design:  make a
choice and then solve a subproblem, rather than the bottom-up technique of solving
subproblems before making a choice.
A recursive greedy algorithm
Now that we have seen how to bypass the dynamic-programming approach and in-
stead use a top-down, greedy algorithm, we can write a straightforward, recursive
procedure  to  solve  the  activity-selection  problem.   The  procedure  R
ECURSIVE-
A
CTIVITY-SELECTORtakes the start and finish times of the activities, represented
as arrayssandf,
2
the indexkthat defines the subproblemS
k
it is to solve, and
2
Because the pseudocode takessandfas arrays, it indexes into them with square brackets rather
than subscripts.

16.1An activity-selection problem419
the sizenof the original problem. It returns a maximum-size set of mutually com-
patible activities inS
k
.  We assume that theninput activities are already ordered
by monotonically increasing finish time, according to equation (16.1).  If not, we
can sort them into this order inO.nlgn/time, breaking ties arbitrarily.  In order
to start,  we add the fictitious activitya
0
withf
0
D0,  so that subproblemS
0
is
the entire set of activitiesS.  The initial call, which solves the entire problem, is
R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;0;n/.
R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;k;n/
1mDkC1
2whilemnandsŒm < f Œk//find the first activity inS
k
to finish
3mDmC1
4ifmn
5return
f
a
m
g
[R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;m;n/
6else return;
Figure  16.1  shows  the  operation  of  the  algorithm.   In  a  given  recursive  call
R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;k;n/,thewhileloop of lines 2–3 looks
for the first activity  inS
k
to finish.   The loop  examinesa
kC1
;a
kC2
;:::;a
n
,  un-
til  it  finds  the  first  activitya
m
that  is  compatible  witha
k
;  such  an  activity  has
s
m
f
k
.  If the loop terminates because it finds such an activity,  line 5 returns
the union of
f
a
m
g
and the maximum-size subset ofS
m
returned by the recursive
call  R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;m;n/.   Alternatively,  the loop may
terminate  becausem>n,  in which case we have examined  all activities  inS
k
without finding one that is compatible witha
k
.  In this case,S
k
D;,andsothe
procedure returns;in line 6.
Assuming that the activities have already been sorted by finish times, the running
time of the call R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;0;n/is‚.n/,whichwe
can see as follows. Over all recursive calls, each activity is examined exactly once
in thewhileloop test of line 2. In particular, activitya
i
is examined in the last call
made in whichk<i.
An iterative greedy algorithm
We easily can convert our recursive procedure to an iterative one.  The procedure
R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTORis almost “tail recursive” (see Problem 7-4):
it ends with a recursive call to itself followed by a union operation.  It is usually a
straightforward task to transform a tail-recursive procedure to an iterative form; in
fact, some compilers for certain programming languages perform this task automat-
ically. As written, R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTORworks for subproblemsS
k
,
i.e., subproblems that consist of the last activities to finish.

420Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
01234567891011121314
time
235
306
457
539
659
7610
8811
9812
10214
111216
114
ks
k
f
k
a
1
a
2
a
1
a
3
a
1
a
4
a
1
a
4
a
5
a
1
a
4
a
6
a
1
a
4
a
7
a
1
a
4
a
8
a
1
a
4
a
8
a
9
a
1
a
4
a
8
a
10
a
1
a
4
a
8
a
11
a
1
a
4
a
8
a
11
0–0
a
1
a
0
a
0
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR(s,f, 0, 11)
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR(s,f, 1, 11)
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR(s,f, 4, 11)
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR(s,f, 8, 11)
m = 1
m = 4
m = 8
m = 11
RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR(s,f, 11, 11)
1516
Figure 16.1The operation of RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTORon the11activities given ear-
lier.   Activities  considered  in  each  recursive  call  appear  between  horizontal  lines.   The  fictitious
activitya
0
finishes at time0, and the initial call RECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;0;11/,se-
lects activitya
1
.  In each recursive call, the activities that have already been selected are shaded,
and the activity shown in white is being considered.  If the starting time of an activity occurs before
the finish time of  the most  recently added  activity (the arrow  between them points  left),  it is re-
jected. Otherwise (the arrow points directly up or to the right), it is selected. The last recursive call,
R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s; f; 11; 11/, returns;. The resulting set of selected activities is
f
a
1
;a
4
;a
8
;a
11
g
.

16.1An activity-selection problem421
The procedure GREEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTORis an iterative version of the pro-
cedure R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.  It also assumes that the input activi-
ties are ordered by monotonically increasing finish time. It collects selected activ-
ities into a setAand returns this set when it is done.
G
REEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s; f /
1nDs:length
2AD
f
a
1
g
3kD1
4formD2ton
5ifsŒmfŒk
6ADA[
f
a
m
g
7kDm
8returnA
The procedure works as follows. The variablekindexes the most recent addition
toA, corresponding to the activitya
k
in the recursive version.  Since we consider
the  activities  in  order  of  monotonically  increasing  finish  time,f
k
is  always  the
maximum finish time of any activity inA.Thatis,
f
k
Dmax
f
f
i
Wa
i
2A
g
:(16.3)
Lines 2–3 select activitya
1
, initializeAto contain just this activity, and initializek
to index this activity.  Theforloop of lines 4–7 finds the earliest activity inS
k
to
finish. The loop considers each activitya
m
in turn and addsa
m
toAif it is compat-
ible with all previously selected activities; such an activity is the earliest inS
k
to
finish. To see whether activitya
m
is compatible with every activity currently inA,
it suffices by equation (16.3) to check (in line 5) that its start times
m
is not earlier
than the finish timef
k
of the activity most recently added toA.  If activitya
m
is
compatible, then lines 6–7 add activitya
m
toAand setktom. The setAreturned
by the call G
REEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s; f /is precisely the set returned by
the call R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.s;f;0;n/.
Like the recursive version, G
REEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTORschedules a set ofn
activities in‚.n/time, assuming that the activities were already sorted initially by
their finish times.
Exercises
16.1-1
Give a dynamic-programming algorithm for the activity-selection problem, based
on recurrence  (16.2).   Have your  algorithm  compute  the sizescŒi; j as defined
above and also produce the maximum-size subset of mutually compatible activities.

422Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Assume that the inputs have been sorted as in equation (16.1). Compare the running
time of your solution to the running time of G
REEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR.
16.1-2
Suppose that instead of always selecting the first activity to finish, we instead select
the last activity to start that is compatible with all previously selected activities. De-
scribe how this approach is a greedy algorithm, and prove that it yields an optimal
solution.
16.1-3
Not just any greedy approach  to the activity-selection  problem  produces a max-
imum-size  set of mutually  compatible  activities.   Give an example  to show  that
the approach of selecting the activity of least duration from among those that are
compatible  with  previously  selected  activities  does  not  work.   Do  the  same  for
the approaches of always selecting the compatible activity that overlaps the fewest
other remaining activities and always selecting the compatible remaining activity
with the earliest start time.
16.1-4
Suppose that we have a set of activities to schedule among a large number of lecture
halls, where any activity can take place in any lecture hall.  We wish to schedule
all the activities  using as few lecture halls as possible.   Give an efficient greedy
algorithm to determine which activity should use which lecture hall.
(This problem is also known as theinterval-graph coloring problem.  We can
create an interval  graph whose vertices are the given activities and whose edges
connect incompatible activities.  The smallest number of colors required to color
every vertex so that no two adjacent vertices have the same color corresponds to
finding the fewest lecture halls needed to schedule all of the given activities.)
16.1-5
Consider a modification to the activity-selection problem in which each activitya
i
has, in addition to a start and finish time, a value
i
.  The objective is no longer
to maximize the number of activities scheduled, but instead to maximize the total
value of the activities scheduled.  That is, we wish to choose a setAof compatible
activities such that
P
a
k
2A

k
is maximized. Give a polynomial-time algorithm for
this problem.

16.2Elements of the greedy strategy423
16.2  Elements of the greedy strategy
A greedy algorithm obtains an optimal solution to a problem by making a sequence
of choices.  At each decision point, the algorithm makes choice that seems best at
the moment.  This heuristic strategy does not always produce an optimal solution,
but as we saw in the activity-selection  problem, sometimes it does.  This section
discusses some of the general properties of greedy methods.
The process that we followed in Section 16.1 to develop a greedy algorithm was
a bit more involved than is typical. We went through the following steps:
1.  Determine the optimal substructure of the problem.
2.  Develop a recursive solution.  (For the activity-selection  problem,  we formu-
lated recurrence (16.2), but we bypassed developing a recursive algorithm based
on this recurrence.)
3.  Show that if we make the greedy choice, then only one subproblem remains.
4.  Prove that it is always safe to make the greedy choice. (Steps 3 and 4 can occur
in either order.)
5.  Develop a recursive algorithm that implements the greedy strategy.
6.  Convert the recursive algorithm to an iterative algorithm.
In going through these steps, we saw in great detail the dynamic-programming un-
derpinnings of a greedy algorithm. For example, in the activity-selection problem,
we first defined the subproblemsS
ij
, where bothiandjvaried.  We then found
that if we always made the greedy choice, we could restrict the subproblems to be
of the formS
k
.
Alternatively, we could have fashioned our optimal substructure with a greedy
choice  in  mind,  so  that  the  choice  leaves  just  one  subproblem  to  solve.   In  the
activity-selection problem, we could have started by dropping the second subscript
and defining subproblems of the formS
k
. Then, we could have proven that a greedy
choice (the first activitya
m
to finish inS
k
), combined with an optimal solution to
the remaining  setS
m
of compatible  activities,  yields  an optimal  solution  toS
k
.
More generally, we design greedy algorithms according to the following sequence
of steps:
1.  Cast the optimization problem as one in which we make a choice and are left
with one subproblem to solve.
2.  Prove that there is always an optimal solution to the original problem that makes
the greedy choice, so that the greedy choice is always safe.

424Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
3.   Demonstrate  optimal  substructure  by  showing  that,  having  made  the  greedy
choice, what remains is a subproblem with the property that if we combine an
optimal solution to the subproblem with the greedy choice we have made, we
arrive at an optimal solution to the original problem.
We shall use this more direct process in later sections of this chapter.  Neverthe-
less, beneath every greedy algorithm, there is almost always a more cumbersome
dynamic-programming solution.
How can we tell whether a greedy algorithm will solve a particular optimization
problem?  No way works all the time, but the greedy-choice property and optimal
substructure are the two key ingredients.  If we can demonstrate that the problem
has these properties, then we are well on the way to developing a greedy algorithm
for it.
Greedy-choice property
The first key ingredient is thegreedy-choice property: we can assemble a globally
optimal solution by making locally optimal (greedy) choices. In other words, when
we are considering which choice to make, we make the choice that looks best in
the current problem, without considering results from subproblems.
Here is where greedy algorithms differ from dynamic programming. In dynamic
programming, we make a choice at each step, but the choice usually depends on the
solutions to subproblems. Consequently, we typically solve dynamic-programming
problems in a bottom-up manner, progressing from smaller subproblems to larger
subproblems.   (Alternatively,  we can solve  them  top  down,  but  memoizing.   Of
course,  even though the code works top down,  we still must solve the subprob-
lems before making a choice.)  In a greedy algorithm, we make whatever choice
seems best at the moment and then solve the subproblem that remains. The choice
made by a greedy algorithm may depend on choices so far, but it cannot depend on
any future choices or on the solutions to subproblems.  Thus, unlike dynamic pro-
gramming, which solves the subproblems before making the first choice, a greedy
algorithm  makes  its  first  choice  before  solving  any  subproblems.   A  dynamic-
programming  algorithm  proceeds  bottom  up,  whereas  a  greedy  strategy  usually
progresses in a top-down fashion, making one greedy choice after another, reduc-
ing each given problem instance to a smaller one.
Of course,  we must  prove that  a greedy  choice  at each step yields  a globally
optimal solution.  Typically,  as in the case of Theorem 16.1, the proof examines
a  globally  optimal  solution  to  some  subproblem.   It  then  shows  how  to  modify
the solution to substitute the greedy choice for some other choice, resulting in one
similar, but smaller, subproblem.
We can usually make the greedy choice more efficiently than when we have to
consider a wider set of choices. For example, in the activity-selection problem, as-

16.2Elements of the greedy strategy425
suming that we had already sorted the activities in monotonically increasing order
of finish times, we needed to examine each activity just once. By preprocessing the
input or by using an appropriate data structure (often a priority queue), we often
can make greedy choices quickly, thus yielding an efficient algorithm.
Optimal substructure
A  problem  exhibitsoptimal substructureif  an  optimal  solution  to  the  problem
contains  within  it  optimal  solutions  to  subproblems.   This  property  is  a key  in-
gredient of assessing the applicability of dynamic programming as well as greedy
algorithms. As an example of optimal substructure, recall how we demonstrated in
Section 16.1 that if an optimal solution to subproblemS
ij
includes an activitya
k
,
then it must also contain optimal solutions to the subproblemsS
ik
andS
kj
.Given
this optimal substructure, we argued that if we knew which activity to use asa
k
,we
could construct an optimal solution toS
ij
by selectinga
k
along with all activities
in optimal solutions to the subproblemsS
ik
andS
kj
. Based on this observation of
optimal substructure, we were able to devise the recurrence (16.2) that described
the value of an optimal solution.
We  usually  use  a  more  direct  approach  regarding  optimal  substructure  when
applying  it  to  greedy  algorithms.   As  mentioned  above,  we  have  the  luxury  of
assuming that we arrived at a subproblem  by having  made the greedy  choice in
the original problem.  All we really need to do is argue that an optimal solution to
the subproblem, combined with the greedy choice already made, yields an optimal
solution  to  the  original  problem.   This  scheme  implicitly  uses  induction  on  the
subproblems  to  prove  that  making  the  greedy  choice  at  every  step  produces  an
optimal solution.
Greedy versus dynamic programming
Because both the greedy and dynamic-programming strategies exploit optimal sub-
structure, you might be tempted to generate a dynamic-programming solution to a
problem when a greedy solution suffices or, conversely, you might mistakenly think
that a greedy solution works when in fact a dynamic-programming solution is re-
quired.  To illustrate the subtleties between the two techniques,  let us investigate
two variants of a classical optimization problem.
The0-1 knapsack problemis the  following.   A  thief  robbing  a store  findsn
items. Theith item is worth
i
dollars and weighsw
i
pounds, where
i
andw
i
are
integers. The thief wants to take as valuable a load as possible, but he can carry at
mostWpounds in his knapsack, for some integerW. Which items should he take?
(We call this the 0-1 knapsack problem because for each item, the thief must either

426Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
take it or leave it behind; he cannot take a fractional amount of an item or take an
item more than once.)
In thefractional knapsack problem, the setup is the same, but the thief can take
fractions of items, rather than having to make a binary (0-1) choice for each item.
You can think of an item in the 0-1 knapsack problem as being like a gold ingot
and an item in the fractional knapsack problem as more like gold dust.
Both knapsack problems exhibit the optimal-substructure property.  For the 0-1
problem,  consider the most valuable load that weighs at mostWpounds.  If we
remove itemjfrom this load, the remaining load must be the most valuable load
weighing  at mostWw
j
that the thief can take from then1original  items
excludingj.  For the comparable fractional problem, consider that if we remove
a weightwof one itemjfrom the optimal load, the remaining load must be the
most valuable load weighing at mostWwthat the thief can take from then1
original items plusw
j
wpounds of itemj.
Although the problems are similar, we can solve the fractional knapsack problem
by a greedy strategy, but we cannot solve the 0-1 problem by such a strategy.  To
solve the fractional problem, we first compute the value per pound
i
=w
i
for each
item. Obeying a greedy strategy, the thief begins by taking as much as possible of
the item with the greatest value per pound.  If the supply of that item is exhausted
and he can still carry more, he takes as much as possible of the item with the next
greatest value per pound, and so forth, until he reaches his weight limitW.  Thus,
by sorting the items by value per pound,  the greedy algorithm runs inO.nlgn/
time.   We leave  the  proof  that  the  fractional  knapsack  problem  has  the  greedy-
choice property as Exercise 16.2-1.
To see that this greedy strategy does not work for the 0-1 knapsack  problem,
consider  the problem  instance  illustrated  in Figure 16.2(a).   This example has3
items  and  a  knapsack  that  can  hold50pounds.   Item1weighs10pounds  and
is worth60dollars.  Item2weighs20pounds and is worth100dollars.  Item3
weighs30pounds and is worth120dollars. Thus, the value per pound of item1is
6dollars per pound, which is greater than the value per pound of either item2(5
dollars per pound) or item3(4dollars per pound).  The greedy strategy, therefore,
would take item1first.  As you can see from the case analysis in Figure 16.2(b),
however, the optimal solution takes items2and3, leaving item1behind. The two
possible solutions that take item1are both suboptimal.
For  the  comparable  fractional  problem,  however,  the  greedy  strategy,  which
takes item1first, does yield an optimal solution, as shown in Figure 16.2(c). Tak-
ing item1doesn’t work in the 0-1 problem because the thief is unable to fill his
knapsack to capacity, and the empty space lowers the effective value per pound of
his load.  In the 0-1 problem, when we consider whether to include an item in the
knapsack, we must compare the solution to the subproblem that includes the item
with the solution to the subproblem that excludes the item before we can make the

16.2Elements of the greedy strategy427
10
$60
item 1
20
$100
item 2
30
$120
item 3
50
knapsack
(a)
+
$120
$100
= $220
+
$60
$100
= $160
+
$60
$120
= $180
(b)
+
$60
$100
= $240
$80
+
(c)
20
30
10
20
10
30
10
20
20
30
Figure 16.2An example  showing  that  the  greedy  strategy  does  not  work  for  the  0-1 knapsack
problem.(a)The thief must select a subset of the three items shown whose weight must not exceed
50pounds.(b)The optimal subset includes items2and3.  Any solution with item1is suboptimal,
even though item1has the greatest value per pound.(c)For the fractional knapsack problem, taking
the items in order of greatest value per pound yields an optimal solution.
choice.  The problem formulated in this way gives rise to many overlapping sub-
problems—a hallmark of dynamic programming,  and indeed,  as Exercise 16.2-2
asks you to show, we can use dynamic programming to solve the 0-1 problem.
Exercises
16.2-1
Prove that the fractional knapsack problem has the greedy-choice property.
16.2-2
Give a dynamic-programming  solution to the 0-1 knapsack problem that runs in
O.n W /time, wherenis the number of items andWis the maximum weight of
items that the thief can put in his knapsack.
16.2-3
Suppose that in a 0-1 knapsack  problem,  the order  of the items when sorted  by
increasing weight is the same as their order when sorted by decreasing value. Give
an efficient algorithm  to find an optimal solution to this variant  of the knapsack
problem, and argue that your algorithm is correct.
16.2-4
Professor Gekko has always dreamed of inline skating across North Dakota.  He
plans to cross the state on highway U.S. 2, which runs from Grand Forks, on the
eastern border with Minnesota, to Williston, near the western border with Montana.

428Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
The professor can carry two liters of water, and he can skatemmiles before running
out of water.  (Because North Dakota is relatively flat, the professor does not have
to worry about drinking water at a greater rate on uphill sections than on flat or
downhill sections.)  The professor will start in Grand Forks with two full liters of
water.  His official North Dakota state map shows all the places along U.S. 2 at
which he can refill his water and the distances between these locations.
The professor’s goal is to minimize the number of water stops along his route
across the state.  Give an efficient method by which he can determine which water
stops he should make. Prove that your strategy yields an optimal solution, and give
its running time.
16.2-5
Describe an efficient algorithm that, given a set
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
g
of points on the
real line, determines the smallest set of unit-length closed intervals that contains
all of the given points. Argue that your algorithm is correct.
16.2-6?
Show how to solve the fractional knapsack problem inO.n/time.
16.2-7
Suppose you are given two setsAandB, each containingnpositive integers. You
can choose to reorder each set however you like. After reordering, leta
i
be theith
element of setA,andletb
i
be theith element of setB. You then receive a payoff
of
Q
n
iD1
a
i
b
i
.  Give an algorithm that will maximize your payoff.  Prove that your
algorithm maximizes the payoff, and state its running time.
16.3  Huffman codes
Huffman codes compress data very effectively: savings of 20% to 90% are typical,
depending  on the characteristics  of the data being compressed.  We consider  the
data to be a sequence of characters. Huffman’s greedy algorithm uses a table giving
how often each character occurs (i.e., its frequency) to build up an optimal way of
representing each character as a binary string.
Suppose we have a 100,000-character data file that we wish to store compactly.
We observe that the characters in the file occur with the frequencies given by Fig-
ure 16.3.  That is, only6different characters appear,  and the characteraoccurs
45,000 times.
We have many options for how to represent  such a file of information.   Here,
we consider the problem of designing abinary character code(orcodefor short)

16.3Huffman codes429
abcd e f
Frequency (in thousands)4513121695
Fixed-length codeword000001010011100101
Variable-length codeword010110011111011100
Figure 16.3A character-coding problem. A data file of 100,000 characters contains only the char-
actersa–f, with the frequencies indicated.  If we assign each character a 3-bit codeword,  we can
encode the file in 300,000 bits. Using the variable-length code shown, we can encode the file in only
224,000 bits.
in which each character is represented by a unique binary string, which we call a
codeword.Ifweuseafixed-length code, we need3bits to represent6characters:
a= 000,b= 001,...,f= 101.  This method requires  300,000 bits to code the
entire file. Can we do better?
Avariable-length codecan do considerably better than a fixed-length code, by
giving frequent characters  short codewords and infrequent  characters long code-
words. Figure 16.3 shows such a code; here the 1-bit string0representsa,andthe
4-bit string1100representsf. This code requires
.451C133C123C163C94C54/1,000D224,000 bits
to represent  the file, a savings of approximately 25%.  In fact, this is an optimal
character code for this file, as we shall see.
Prefix codes
We consider here only codes in which no codeword is also a prefix of some other
codeword. Such codes are calledprefix codes.
3
Although we won’t prove it here, a
prefix code can always achieve the optimal data compression among any character
code, and so we suffer no loss of generality by restricting our attention to prefix
codes.
Encoding is always simple for any binary character code; we just concatenate the
codewords representing each character of the file. For example, with the variable-
length prefix code of Figure 16.3, we code the 3-character fileabcas0101100D
0101100,where“” denotes concatenation.
Prefix codes are desirable because they simplify decoding.  Since no codeword
is a prefix of any other, the codeword that begins an encoded file is unambiguous.
We can simply identify the initial codeword, translate it back to the original char-
3
Perhaps “prefix-free codes” would be a better name, but the term “prefix codes” is standard in the
literature.

430Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
a:45b:13c:12d:16e:9f:5
582814
8614
100
01   01   01
010
01
e:9f:5
14
01
c:12b:13
25
01
d:16
30
01
55
01
a:45
100
01
(a)(b)
Figure 16.4Trees corresponding to the coding schemes in Figure 16.3.  Each leaf is labeled with
a character and its frequency of occurrence.  Each internal node is labeled with the sum of the fre-
quencies of the leaves in its subtree.(a)The tree corresponding to the fixed-length codea= 000,...,
f= 101.(b)The tree corresponding to the optimal prefix codea=0,b= 101,...,f= 1100.
acter, and repeat the decoding process on the remainder of the encoded file. In our
example, the string001011101parses uniquely as001011101, which decodes
toaabe.
The decoding process needs a convenient representation for the prefix code so
that we can easily pick off the initial codeword.  A binary tree whose leaves are
the  given  characters  provides  one  such  representation.   We  interpret  the  binary
codeword for a character as the simple path from the root to that character, where0
means “go to the left child” and1means “go to the right child.” Figure 16.4 shows
the trees for the two codes of our example.  Note that these are not binary search
trees,  since the leaves need not appear in sorted order and internal nodes do not
contain character keys.
An optimal code for a file is always represented by afullbinary tree, in which
every nonleaf node has two children (see Exercise 16.3-2).  The fixed-length code
in our example is not optimal since its tree, shown in Figure 16.4(a), is not a full bi-
nary tree: it contains codewords beginning 10..., butnone beginning 11.... Since
we can now restrict our attention to full binary trees, we can say that ifCis the
alphabet from which the characters are drawn and all character frequencies are pos-
itive, then the tree for an optimal prefix code has exactly
j
C
j
leaves, one for each
letter of the alphabet, and exactly
j
C
j
1internal nodes (see Exercise B.5-3).
Given a treeTcorresponding to a prefix code, we can easily compute the number
of bits required to encode a file.  For each charactercin the alphabetC,letthe
attributec:freqdenote the frequency ofcin the file and letd
T
.c/denote the depth

16.3Huffman codes431
ofc’s  leaf  in  the  tree.   Note  thatd
T
.c/is  also  the  length  of  the  codeword  for
characterc. The number of bits required to encode a file is thus
B.T /D
X
c2C
c:freqd
T
.c/ ;(16.4)
which we define as thecostof the treeT.
Constructing a Huffman code
Huffman invented a greedy algorithm that constructs an optimal prefix code called
aHuffman code.  In line with our observations in Section 16.2, its proof of cor-
rectness  relies  on  the  greedy-choice  property  and  optimal  substructure.   Rather
than demonstrating that these properties hold and then developing pseudocode, we
present the pseudocode first.  Doing so will help clarify how the algorithm makes
greedy choices.
In the pseudocode that follows, we assume thatCis a set ofncharacters and
that each characterc2Cis an object with an attributec:freqgiving its frequency.
The algorithm builds the treeTcorresponding to the optimal code in a bottom-up
manner.   It begins  with a set of
j
C
j
leaves and performs  a sequence  of
j
C
j
1
“merging”  operations  to create the final tree.  The algorithm  uses a min-priority
queueQ,keyedonthefreqattribute, to identify the two least-frequent objects to
merge  together.   When  we merge  two objects,  the result  is a new  object  whose
frequency is the sum of the frequencies of the two objects that were merged.
H
UFFMAN.C /
1nD
j
C
j
2QDC
3foriD1ton1
4allocate a new node ́
5 ́:leftDxDE
XTRACT-MIN.Q/
6 ́:rightDyDE
XTRACT-MIN.Q/
7 ́:freqDx:freqCy:freq
8I
NSERT.Q;  ́/
9returnE
XTRACT-MIN.Q///return the root of the tree
For our example, Huffman’s algorithm proceeds as shown in Figure 16.5.  Since
the alphabet contains6letters, the initial queue size isnD6,and5merge steps
build the tree. The final tree represents the optimal prefix code. The codeword for
a letter is the sequence of edge labels on the simple path from the root to the letter.
Line 2 initializes the min-priority queueQwith the characters inC.Thefor
loop in lines 3–8 repeatedly extracts the two nodesxandyof lowest frequency

432Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
e:9f:5
14
01
c:12b:13
25
01
d:16
30
01
55
01
a:45
100
01
e:9f:5
14
01
c:12b:13
25
01
d:16
30
01
55
01
a:45
e:9f:5
14
01
c:12b:13
25
01
d:16
30
01
a:45
e:9f:5
14
01
c:12b:13
25
01
d:16a:45
e:9f:5
14
01
c:12b:13d:16a:45e:9f:5c:12b:13d:16a:45(a)
(c)
(e)
(b)
(d)
(f)
Figure 16.5The steps of Huffman’s algorithm for the frequencies given in Figure 16.3. Each part
shows the contents of the queue sorted into increasing order by frequency.  At each step, the two
trees with lowest frequencies  are merged.   Leaves are shown as rectangles  containing a character
and its frequency.  Internal nodes are shown as circles containing the sum of the frequencies of their
children.  An edge connecting an internal node with its children is labeled0if it is an edge to a left
child and1if it is an edge to a right child. The codeword for a letter is the sequence of labels on the
edges connecting the root to the leaf for that letter.(a)The initial set ofnD6nodes, one for each
letter.(b)–(e)Intermediate stages.(f)The final tree.
from the queue, replacing them in the queue with a new node ́representing their
merger.  The frequency of ́is computed as the sum of the frequencies ofxandy
in line 7.  The node ́hasxas its left child andyas its right child.  (This order is
arbitrary; switching the left and right child of any node yields a different code of
the same cost.)  Aftern1mergers, line 9 returns the one node left in the queue,
which is the root of the code tree.
Although the algorithm would produce the same result if we were to excise the
variablesxandy—assigning directly to ́:leftand ́:rightin lines 5 and 6, and
changing  line  7 to ́:freqD ́:left:freqC ́:right:freq—we shall  use  the  node

16.3Huffman codes433
namesxandyin the proof  of correctness.   Therefore,  we find it convenient  to
leave them in.
To analyze the running time of Huffman’s algorithm, we assume thatQis im-
plemented as a binary min-heap (see Chapter 6).  For a setCofncharacters, we
can initializeQin line 2 inO.n/time using the B
UILD-MIN-HEAPprocedure dis-
cussed in Section 6.3. Theforloop in lines 3–8 executes exactlyn1times, and
since each heap operation requires timeO.lgn/, the loop contributesO.nlgn/to
the running time.  Thus, the total running time of H
UFFMANon a set ofncharac-
ters isO.nlgn/.  We can reduce the running time toO.nlg lgn/by replacing the
binary min-heap with a van Emde Boas tree (see Chapter 20).
Correctness of Huffman’s algorithm
To prove that the greedy algorithm H
UFFMANis correct, we show that the prob-
lem of determining an optimal prefix code exhibits the greedy-choice and optimal-
substructure  properties.   The next  lemma shows that  the greedy-choice  property
holds.
Lemma 16.2
LetCbe an alphabet in which each characterc2Chas frequencyc:freq.Let
xandybe two characters inChaving the lowest frequencies.  Then there exists
an optimal prefix code forCin which the codewords forxandyhave the same
length and differ only in the last bit.
ProofThe idea of the proof is to take the treeTrepresenting an arbitrary optimal
prefix code and modify it to make a tree representing another optimal prefix code
such that the charactersxandyappear as sibling leaves of maximum depth in the
new tree. If we can construct such a tree, then the codewords forxandywill have
the same length and differ only in the last bit.
Letaandbbe two characters that are sibling leaves of maximum depth inT.
Without loss of generality, we assume thata:freqb:freqandx:freqy:freq.
Sincex:freqandy:freqare the two lowest leaf frequencies,  in order, anda:freq
andb:freqare two arbitrary frequencies,  in order,  we havex:freqa:freqand
y:freqb:freq.
In the remainder of the proof, it is possible that we could havex:freqDa:freq
ory:freqDb:freq. However, if we hadx:
freqDb:freq, then we would also have
a:freqDb:freqDx:freqDy:freq(see Exercise 16.3-1), and the lemma would
be trivially true.  Thus,  we will assume thatx:freq¤b:freq, which means that
x¤b.
As Figure 16.6 shows, we exchange the positions inTofaandxto produce a
treeT
0
, and then we exchange the positions inT
0
ofbandyto produce a treeT
00

434Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
x
y
abx
y
a
bxy
a
b
T′′
T
T′
Figure 16.6An illustration of the key step in the proof of Lemma 16.2.  In the optimal treeT,
leavesaandbare two siblings of maximum depth.  Leavesxandyare the two characters with the
lowest frequencies; they appear in arbitrary positions inT. Assuming thatx¤b, swapping leavesa
andxproduces treeT
0
, and then swapping leavesbandyproduces treeT
00
. Since each swap does
not increase the cost, the resulting treeT
00
is also an optimal tree.
in whichxandyare sibling leaves of maximum depth.  (Note that ifxDbbut
y¤a, then treeT
00
does not havexandyas sibling leaves of maximum depth.
Because we assume thatx¤b, this situation cannot occur.)  By equation (16.4),
the difference in cost betweenTandT
0
is
B.T /B.T
0
/
D
X
c2C
c:freqd
T
.c/
X
c2C
c:freqd
T
0
.c/
Dx:freqd
T
.x/Ca:freqd
T
.a/x:freqd
T
0
.x/a:freqd
T
0
.a/
Dx:freqd
T
.x/Ca:freqd
T
.a/x:freqd
T
.a/a:freqd
T
.x/
D.a:freqx:freq/.d
T
.a/d
T
.x//
0;
because botha:freqx:freqandd
T
.a/d
T
.x/are nonnegative.  More specifi-
cally,a:freqx:freqis nonnegative becausexis a minimum-frequency leaf, and
d
T
.a/d
T
.x/is nonnegative becauseais a leaf of maximum depth inT. Similarly,
exchangingyandbdoes not increase the cost, and soB.T
0
/B.T
00
/is nonnega-
tive. Therefore,B.T
00
/B.T /, and sinceTis optimal, we haveB.T /B.T
00
/,
which impliesB.T
00
/DB.T /.   Thus,T
00
is an optimal  tree in whichxandy
appear as sibling leaves of maximum depth, from which the lemma follows.
Lemma 16.2 implies that the process of building up an optimal tree by mergers
can, without loss of generality, begin with the greedy choice of merging together
those two characters of lowest frequency.  Why is this a greedy choice?  We can
view the cost of a single merger as being the sum of the frequencies of the two items
being  merged.   Exercise 16.3-4  shows that  the total  cost  of the  tree constructed
equals the sum of the costs of its mergers.  Of all possible mergers at each step,
H
UFFMANchooses the one that incurs the least cost.

16.3Huffman codes435
The next lemma shows that the problem of constructing optimal prefix codes has
the optimal-substructure property.
Lemma 16.3
LetCbe a given alphabet with frequencyc:freqdefined for each characterc2C.
Letxandybe  two  characters  inCwith  minimum  frequency.   LetC
0
be  the
alphabetCwith the charactersxandyremoved  and a new character ́added,
so  thatC
0
DC
f
x; y
g
[
f
 ́
g
.DefinefforC
0
as  forC,  except  that
 ́:freqDx:freqCy:freq.LetT
0
be any tree representing an optimal prefix code
for the alphabetC
0
.  Then the treeT, obtained fromT
0
by replacing the leaf node
for ́with an internal node havingxandyas children, represents an optimal prefix
code for the alphabetC.
ProofWe  first  show  how  to  express  the  costB.T /of  treeTin  terms  of  the
costB.T
0
/of  treeT
0
,  by  considering  the  component  costs  in  equation  (16.4).
For  each  characterc2C
f
x; y
g
,wehavethatd
T
.c/Dd
T
0
.c/,  and  hence
c:freqd
T
.c/Dc:freqd
T
0
.c/.Sinced
T
.x/Dd
T
.y/Dd
T
0
. ́/C1,wehave
x:freqd
T
.x/Cy:freqd
T
.y/D.x:freqCy:freq/.d
T
0
. ́/C1/
D ́:freqd
T
0
. ́/C.x:freqCy:freq/;
from which we conclude that
B.T /DB.T
0
/Cx:freqCy:freq
or, equivalently,
B.T
0
/DB.T /x:freqy:freq:
We  now  prove  the  lemma  by  contradiction.   Suppose  thatTdoes  not  repre-
sent an optimal prefix code forC.  Then there exists an optimal treeT
00
such that
B.T
00
/<B.T/.  Without loss of generality (by Lemma 16.2),T
00
hasxandyas
siblings.  LetT
000
be the treeT
00
with the common parent ofxandyreplaced by a
leaf ́with frequency ́:freqDx:freqCy:freq.Then
B.T
000
/DB.T
00
/x:freqy:freq
<B.T/x:freqy:freq
DB.T
0
/;
yielding a contradiction to the assumption thatT
0
represents an optimal prefix code
forC
0
. Thus,Tmust represent an optimal prefix code for the alphabetC.
Theorem 16.4
Procedure H
UFFMANproduces an optimal prefix code.
ProofImmediate from Lemmas 16.2 and 16.3.

436Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Exercises
16.3-1
Explain why, in the proof of Lemma 16.2, ifx:freqDb:freq, then we must have
a:freqDb:freqDx:freqDy:freq.
16.3-2
Prove that a binary tree that is not full cannot correspond to an optimal prefix code.
16.3-3
What is an optimal Huffman code for the following set of frequencies,  based on
the first 8 Fibonacci numbers?
a:1b:1c:2d:3e:5f:8g:13h:21
Can you generalize your answer to find the optimal code when the frequencies are
the firstnFibonacci numbers?
16.3-4
Prove that we can also express the total cost of a tree for a code as the sum, over
all internal nodes, of the combined frequencies of the two children of the node.
16.3-5
Prove  that  if  we  order  the  characters  in  an  alphabet  so  that  their  frequencies
are monotonically decreasing, then there exists an optimal code whose codeword
lengths are monotonically increasing.
16.3-6
Suppose we have an optimal prefix code on a setCD
f
0; 1; : : : ; n1
g
of charac-
ters and we wish to transmit this code using as few bits as possible.  Show how to
represent any optimal prefix code onCusing only2n1Cn
d
lgn
e
bits.  (Hint:
Use2n1bits to specify the structure of the tree, as discovered by a walk of the
tree.)
16.3-7
Generalize Huffman’s algorithm to ternary codewords (i.e., codewords using the
symbols0,1,and2), and prove that it yields optimal ternary codes.
16.3-8
Suppose that a data file contains a sequence of 8-bit characters such that all 256
characters  are about equally common:  the maximum character  frequency is less
than twice the minimum character frequency.  Prove that Huffman coding in this
case is no more efficient than using an ordinary 8-bit fixed-length code.

16.4Matroids and greedy methods437
16.3-9
Show that no compression scheme can expect to compress a file of randomly cho-
sen 8-bit characters by even a single bit.  (Hint:Compare the number of possible
files with the number of possible encoded files.)
?16.4  Matroids and greedy methods
In this section, we sketch a beautiful theory about greedy algorithms.  This theory
describes many situations in which the greedy method yields optimal solutions.  It
involves combinatorial structures known as “matroids.” Although this theory does
not cover all cases for which a greedy method applies  (for example,  it does not
cover the activity-selection problem of Section 16.1 or the Huffman-coding prob-
lem of Section 16.3), it does cover many cases of practical interest.  Furthermore,
this theory has been extended to cover many applications; see the notes at the end
of this chapter for references.
Matroids
Amatroidis an ordered pairMD.S;/satisfying the following conditions.
1.Sis a finite set.
2.is a nonempty family of subsets ofS, called theindependentsubsets ofS,
such that ifB2andAB,thenA2.  We say thatishereditaryif it
satisfies this property. Note that the empty set;is necessarily a member of.
3.  IfA2,B2,and
j
A
j
<
j
B
j
, then there exists some elementx2BA
such thatA[
f
x
g
2. We say thatMsatisfies theexchange property.
The word “matroid” is due to Hassler Whitney.  He was studyingmatric ma-
troids, in which the elements ofSare the rows of a given matrix and a set of rows is
independent if they are linearly independent in the usual sense. As Exercise 16.4-2
asks you to show, this structure defines a matroid.
As another example of matroids, consider thegraphic matroidM
G
D.S
G
;
G
/
defined in terms of a given undirected graphGD.V; E/as follows:

The setS
G
is defined to beE, the set of edges ofG.

IfAis a subset ofE,thenA2
G
if and only ifAis acyclic.  That is, a set of
edgesAis independent if and only if the subgraphG
A
D.V; A/forms a forest.
The graphic matroidM
G
is closely related to the minimum-spanning-tree problem,
which Chapter 23 covers in detail.

438Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Theorem 16.5
IfGD.V; E/is an undirected graph, thenM
G
D.S
G
;
G
/is a matroid.
ProofClearly,S
G
DEis a finite set.  Furthermore,
G
is hereditary,  since a
subset  of  a  forest  is  a  forest.   Putting  it  another  way,  removing  edges  from  an
acyclic set of edges cannot create cycles.
Thus, it remains to show thatM
G
satisfies the exchange property.  Suppose that
G
A
D.V; A/andG
B
D.V; B/are forests ofGand that
j
B
j
>
j
A
j
.Thatis,A
andBare acyclic sets of edges, andBcontains more edges thanAdoes.
We claim that a forestFD.V
F
;E
F
/contains exactly
j
V
F
j

j
E
F
j
trees.  To
see why, suppose thatFconsists ofttrees, where theith tree contains
i
vertices
ande
i
edges. Then, we have
j
E
F
j
D
t
X
iD1
e
i
D
t
X
iD1
.
i
1/(by Theorem B.2)
D
t
X
iD1

i
t
D
j
V
F
j
t;
which implies thattD
j
V
F
j

j
E
F
j
. Thus, forestG
A
contains
j
V
j

j
A
j
trees, and
forestG
B
contains
j
V
j

j
B
j
trees.
Since forestG
B
has fewer trees than  forestG
A
does,  forestG
B
must contain
some  treeTwhose  vertices  are  in  two  different  trees  in  forestG
A
.   Moreover,
sinceTis connected,  it  must  contain  an edge.u; /such  that verticesuand
are in different trees in forestG
A
.  Since the edge.u; /connects vertices in two
different trees in forestG
A
, we can add the edge.u; /to forestG
A
without creating
a cycle.  Therefore,M
G
satisfies the exchange property, completing the proof that
M
G
is a matroid.
Given a matroidMD.S;/, we call an elementx...AanextensionofA2
if we can addxtoAwhile preserving  independence;  that  is,xis an extension
ofAifA[
f
x
g
2.  As an example, consider a graphic matroidM
G
.IfAis an
independent set of edges, then edgeeis an extension ofAif and only ifeis not
inAand the addition ofetoAdoes not create a cycle.
IfAis an independent subset in a matroidM, we say thatAismaximalif it has
no extensions. That is,Ais maximal if it is not contained in any larger independent
subset ofM. The following property is often useful.

16.4Matroids and greedy methods439
Theorem 16.6
All maximal independent subsets in a matroid have the same size.
ProofSuppose  to  the  contrary  thatAis  a  maximal  independent  subset  ofM
and there exists another  larger  maximal independent  subsetBofM.  Then,  the
exchange property implies that for somex2BA, we can extendAto a larger
independent setA[
f
x
g
, contradicting the assumption thatAis maximal.
As an illustration  of this  theorem,  consider  a graphic  matroidM
G
for  a con-
nected, undirected graphG.  Every maximal independent subset ofM
G
must be a
free tree with exactly
j
V
j
1edges that connects all the vertices ofG. Such a tree
is called aspanning treeofG.
We say that a matroidMD.S;/isweightedif it is associated with a weight
functionwthat assigns a strictly positive weightw.x/to each elementx2S.The
weight functionwextends to subsets ofSby summation:
w.A/D
X
x2A
w.x/
for anyAS.  For example, if we letw.e/denote the weight of an edgeein a
graphic matroidM
G
,thenw.A/is the total weight of the edges in edge setA.
Greedy algorithms on a weighted matroid
Many problems for which a greedy approach provides optimal solutions can be for-
mulated in terms of finding a maximum-weight independent subset in a weighted
matroid.  That is, we are given a weighted matroidMD.S;/, and we wish to
find an independent setA2such thatw.A/is maximized.  We call such a sub-
set that is independent and has maximum possible weight anoptimalsubset of the
matroid.  Because the weightw.x/of any elementx2Sis positive, an optimal
subset is always a maximal independent subset—it always helps to makeAas large
as possible.
For example, in theminimum-spanning-tree problem, we are given a connected
undirected graphGD.V; E/and a length functionwsuch thatw.e/is the (posi-
tive) length of edgee. (We use the term “length” here to refer to the original edge
weights for the graph, reserving the term “weight” to refer to the weights in the
associated  matroid.)   We wish to find a subset  of  the  edges  that  connects  all  of
the vertices together and has minimum total length.  To view this as a problem of
finding an optimal subset  of a matroid,  consider  the weighted matroidM
G
with
weight functionw
0
,wherew
0
.e/Dw
0
w.e/andw
0
is larger than the maximum
length of any edge.  In this weighted matroid, all weights are positive and an opti-
mal subset is a spanning tree of minimum total length in the original graph.  More
specifically,  each maximal independent  subsetAcorresponds  to a spanning  tree

440Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
with
j
V
j
1edges, and since
w
0
.A/D
X
e2A
w
0
.e/
D
X
e2A
.w
0
w.e//
D.
j
V
j
1/w
0

X
e2A
w.e/
D.
j
V
j
1/w
0
w.A/
for any maximal independent subsetA, an independent subset that maximizes the
quantityw
0
.A/must minimizew.A/. Thus, any algorithm that can find an optimal
subsetAin an arbitrary matroid can solve the minimum-spanning-tree problem.
Chapter 23 gives algorithms for the minimum-spanning-tree problem, but here
we give a greedy algorithm that works for any weighted matroid.  The algorithm
takes as input a weighted matroidMD.S;/with an associated positive weight
functionw, and it returns an optimal subsetA.  In our pseudocode, we denote the
components ofMbyM:SandM:and the weight function byw. The algorithm
is greedy because it considers in turn each elementx2S, in order of monotoni-
cally decreasing weight, and immediately adds it to the setAbeing accumulated if
A[
f
x
g
is independent.
G
REEDY.M; w/
1AD;
2sortM:Sinto monotonically decreasing order by weightw
3foreachx2M:S, taken in monotonically decreasing order by weightw.x/
4ifA[
f
x
g
2M:
5ADA[
f
x
g
6returnA
Line 4 checks whether adding each elementxtoAwould maintainAas an inde-
pendent set. IfAwould remain independent, then line 5 addsxtoA. Otherwise,x
is discarded. Since the empty set is independent, and since each iteration of thefor
loop maintainsA’s independence,  the subsetAis always independent,  by induc-
tion. Therefore, G
REEDYalways returns an independent subsetA. We shall see in
a moment thatAis a subset of maximum possible weight, so thatAis an optimal
subset.
The running time of G
REEDYis easy to analyze.  Letndenote
j
S
j
.  The sorting
phase of G
REEDYtakes timeO.nlgn/. Line 4 executes exactlyntimes, once for
each element ofS.  Each execution of line 4 requires a check on whether or not
the setA[
f
x
g
is independent.  If each such check takes timeO.f .n//, the entire
algorithm runs in timeO.nlgnCnf .n//.

16.4Matroids and greedy methods441
We now prove that GREEDYreturns an optimal subset.
Lemma 16.7 (Matroids exhibit the greedy-choice property)
Suppose thatMD.S;/is a weighted matroid with weight functionwand thatS
is sorted into monotonically decreasing order by weight. Letxbe the first element
ofSsuch that
f
x
g
is independent, if any suchxexists. Ifxexists, then there exists
an optimal subsetAofSthat containsx.
ProofIf no suchxexists, then the only independent subset is the empty set and
the lemma is vacuously true.  Otherwise, letBbe any nonempty optimal subset.
Assume thatx...B; otherwise, lettingADBgives an optimal subset ofSthat
containsx.
No element ofBhas weight greater thanw.x/. To see why, observe thaty2B
implies that
f
y
g
is independent, sinceB2andis hereditary.  Our choice ofx
therefore ensures thatw.x/w.y/for anyy2B.
Construct the setAas follows. Begin withAD
f
x
g
. By the choice ofx, setAis
independent. Using the exchange property, repeatedly find a new element ofBthat
we can add toA
until
j
A
j
D
j
B
j
, while preserving the independence ofA.Atthat
point,AandBare the same except thatAhasxandBhas some other elementy.
That is,ADB
f
y
g
[
f
x
g
for somey2B,andso
w.A/Dw.B/w.y/Cw.x/
w.B/ :
Because setBis optimal, setA, which containsx, must also be optimal.
We next show that if an element is not an option initially, then it cannot be an
option later.
Lemma 16.8
LetMD.S;/be any matroid.  Ifxis an element ofSthat is an extension of
some independent subsetAofS,thenxis also an extension of;.
ProofSincexis an extension ofA,wehavethatA[
f
x
g
is independent. Since
is hereditary,
f
x
g
must be independent. Thus,xis an extension of;.
Corollary 16.9
LetMD.S;/be any matroid.  Ifxis an element ofSsuch thatxis not an
extension of;,thenxis not an extension of any independent subsetAofS.
ProofThis corollary is simply the contrapositive of Lemma 16.8.

442Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Corollary 16.9 says that any element that cannot be used immediately can never
be  used.   Therefore,  G
REEDYcannot  make  an  error  by  passing  over  any  initial
elements inSthat are not an extension of;, since they can never be used.
Lemma 16.10 (Matroids exhibit the optimal-substructure property)
Letxbe  the  first  element  ofSchosen  by  G
REEDYfor  the  weighted  matroid
MD.S;/.   The  remaining  problem  of  finding  a  maximum-weight  indepen-
dent subset containingxreduces to finding a maximum-weight independent subset
of the weighted matroidM
0
D.S
0
;
0
/,where
S
0
D
f
y2SW
f
x; y
g
2
g
;

0
D
f
BS
f
x
g
WB[
f
x
g
2
g
;
and the weight function forM
0
is the weight function forM, restricted toS
0
.(We
callM
0
thecontractionofMby the elementx.)
ProofIfAis any maximum-weight independent subset ofMcontainingx,then
A
0
DA
f
x
g
is an independent subset ofM
0
.  Conversely, any independent sub-
setA
0
ofM
0
yields an independent subsetADA
0
[
f
x
g
ofM.  Since we have in
both cases thatw.A/Dw.A
0
/Cw.x/, a maximum-weight solution inMcontain-
ingxyields a maximum-weight solution inM
0
, and vice versa.
Theorem 16.11 (Correctness of the greedy algorithm on matroids)
IfMD.S;/is a weighted matroid with weight functionw,thenG
REEDY.M; w/
returns an optimal subset.
ProofBy Corollary  16.9,  any  elements  that  G
REEDYpasses  over initially  be-
cause  they are not  extensions  of;can be forgotten  about,  since they can never
be  useful.   Once  G
REEDYselects  the  first elementx,  Lemma 16.7  implies  that
the algorithm does not err by addingxtoA, since there exists an optimal subset
containingx.  Finally, Lemma 16.10 implies that the remaining problem is one of
finding  an optimal  subset  in the matroidM
0
that  is the contraction  ofMbyx.
After the procedure G
REEDYsetsAto
f
x
g
, we can interpret all of its remaining
steps as acting in the matroidM
0
D.S
0
;
0
/, becauseBis independent inM
0
if
and only ifB[
f
x
g
is independent inM, for all setsB2
0
. Thus, the subsequent
operation of G
REEDYwill find a maximum-weight independent subset forM
0
,and
the overall operation of G
REEDYwill find a maximum-weight independent subset
forM.

16.5A task-scheduling problem as a matroid443
Exercises
16.4-1
Show that.S;
k
/is a matroid, whereSis any finite set and
k
is the set of all
subsets ofSof size at mostk,wherek
j
S
j
.
16.4-2?
Given anm	nmatrixTover some field (such as the reals), show that.S;/is a
matroid, whereSis the set of columns ofTandA2if and only if the columns
inAare linearly independent.
16.4-3?
Show that if.S;/is a matroid, then.S;
0
/is a matroid, where

0
D
f
A
0
WSA
0
contains some maximalA2
g
:
That is, the maximal independent sets of.S;
0
/are just the complements of the
maximal independent sets of.S;/.
16.4-4?
LetSbe a finite set and letS
1
;S
2
;:::;S
k
be a partition ofSinto nonempty disjoint
subsets.  Define the structure.S;/by the condition thatD
f
AW
j
A\S
i
j
1
foriD1;2;:::;k
g
.  Show that.S;/is a matroid.  That is, the set of all setsA
that  contain  at  most  one  member  of  each  subset  in  the  partition  determines  the
independent sets of a matroid.
16.4-5
Show how to transform the weight function of a weighted matroid problem, where
the desired optimal solution is aminimum-weightmaximal independent subset, to
make it a standard weighted-matroid problem.  Argue carefully that your transfor-
mation is correct.
?16.5  A task-scheduling problem as a matroid
An interesting  problem  that  we can  solve  using  matroids  is  the  problem  of  op-
timally  scheduling  unit-time  tasks  on  a single  processor,  where  each  task  has  a
deadline,  along with a penalty paid if the task misses its deadline.  The problem
looks complicated, but we can solve it in a surprisingly simple manner by casting
it as a matroid and using a greedy algorithm.
Aunit-time taskis a job, such as a program to be run on a computer, that requires
exactly  one  unit  of  time to complete.   Given a finite setSof unit-time  tasks,  a

444Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
scheduleforSis a permutation  ofSspecifying  the  order  in  which  to perform
these tasks.  The first task in the schedule begins at time0and finishes at time1,
the second task begins at time1and finishes at time2, and so on.
The problem ofscheduling unit-time tasks with deadlines and penalties for a
single processorhas the following inputs:

a setSD
f
a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
g
ofnunit-time tasks;

a set ofnintegerdeadlinesd
1
;d
2
;:::;d
n
, such that eachd
i
satisfies1d
i
n
and taska
i
is supposed to finish by timed
i
;and

a set ofnnonnegative weights orpenaltiesw
1
;w
2
;:::;w
n
, such that we incur
a penalty ofw
i
if taska
i
is not finished by timed
i
, and we incur no penalty if
a task finishes by its deadline.
We  wish  to  find  a  schedule  forSthat  minimizes  the  total  penalty  incurred  for
missed deadlines.
Consider a given schedule. We say that a task islatein this schedule if it finishes
after its deadline. Otherwise, the task isearlyin the schedule. We can always trans-
form an arbitrary schedule intoearly-first form, in which the early tasks precede
the late tasks. To see why, note that if some early taska
i
follows some late taska
j
,
then we can switch the positions ofa
i
anda
j
,anda
i
will still be early anda
j
will
still be late.
Furthermore, we claim that we can always transform an arbitrary schedule into
canonical form, in which the early tasks precede the late tasks and we schedule
the early tasks in order of monotonically increasing deadlines.  To do so, we put
the schedule into early-first form.  Then, as long as there exist two early tasksa
i
anda
j
finishing at respective timeskandkC1in the schedule such thatd
j
<d
i
,
we swap the positions ofa
i
anda
j
.Sincea
j
is early before the swap,kC1d
j
.
Therefore,kC1<d
i
,andsoa
i
is still early after the swap.  Because taska
j
is
moved earlier in the schedule, it remains early after the swap.
The search for an optimal schedule thus reduces to finding a setAof tasks that
we assign to be early in the optimal schedule. Having determinedA, we can create
the actual schedule by listing the elements ofAin order of monotonically increas-
ing deadlines,  then listing  the late tasks (i.e.,SA) in any order,  producing  a
canonical ordering of the optimal schedule.
We say that a setAof tasks isindependentif there exists a schedule for these
tasks such that no tasks are late. Clearly, the set of early tasks for a schedule forms
an independent set of tasks. Letdenote the set of all independent sets of tasks.
Consider the problem of determining whether a given setAof tasks is indepen-
dent.   FortD0; 1; 2; : : : ; n,letN
t
.A/denote  the number of tasks inAwhose
deadline istor earlier. Note thatN
0
.A/D0for any setA.

16.5A task-scheduling problem as a matroid445
Lemma 16.12
For any set of tasksA, the following statements are equivalent.
1.  The setAis independent.
2.  FortD0; 1; 2; : : : ; n,wehaveN
t
.A/t.
3.  If the tasks inAare scheduled in order of monotonically increasing deadlines,
then no task is late.
ProofTo show that (1) implies (2), we prove the contrapositive: ifN
t
.A/ > tfor
somet, then there is no way to make a schedule with no late tasks for setA, because
more thanttasks must finish before timet. Therefore, (1) implies (2). If (2) holds,
then (3) must follow:  there is no way to “get stuck” when scheduling the tasks in
order of monotonically increasing deadlines, since (2) implies that theith largest
deadline is at leasti. Finally, (3) trivially implies (1).
Using property 2 of Lemma 16.12, we can easily compute whether or not a given
set of tasks is independent (see Exercise 16.5-2).
The problem of minimizing the sum of the penalties of the late tasks is the same
as the  problem  of  maximizing  the  sum  of  the  penalties  of  the  early  tasks.   The
following theorem  thus ensures  that we can use the greedy algorithm  to find an
independent setAof tasks with the maximum total penalty.
Theorem 16.13
IfSis a set of unit-time tasks with deadlines, andis the set of all independent
sets of tasks, then the corresponding system.S;/is a matroid.
ProofEvery subset of an independent set of tasks is certainly independent.  To
prove the exchange property, suppose thatBandAare independent sets of tasks
and that
j
B
j
>
j
A
j
.Letkbe the largesttsuch thatN
t
.B/N
t
.A/. (Such a value
oftexists, sinceN
0
.A/DN
0
.B/D0.)  SinceN
n
.B/D
j
B
j
andN
n
.A/D
j
A
j
,
but
j
B
j
>
j
A
j
, we must have thatk<nand thatN
j
.B/  >  N
j
.A/for alljin
the rangekC1jn.  Therefore,Bcontains more tasks with deadlinekC1
thanAdoes. Leta
i
be a task inBAwith deadlinekC1.LetA
0
DA[
f
a
i
g
.
We now show thatA
0
must be independent by using property 2 of Lemma 16.12.
For0tk,wehaveN
t
.A
0
/DN
t
.A/t,sinceAis independent.   For
k<tn,wehaveN
t
.A
0
/N
t
.B/t,sinceBis independent.  Therefore,A
0
is independent, completing our proof that.S;/is a matroid.
By Theorem 16.11, we can use a greedy algorithm to find a maximum-weight
independent  set of tasksA.  We can then create an optimal  schedule  having the
tasks inAas its early tasks.  This method is an efficient algorithm for scheduling

446Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Task
a
i
1234567
d
i
4243146
w
i
70605040302010
Figure 16.7An instance of the problem of scheduling unit-time tasks with deadlines and penalties
for a single processor.
unit-time tasks with deadlines  and penalties for a single processor.  The running
time isO.n
2
/using GREEDY, since each of theO.n/independence checks made
by that algorithm  takes timeO.n/(see Exercise  16.5-2).   Problem  16-4 gives a
faster implementation.
Figure  16.7  demonstrates  an  example  of  the  problem  of  scheduling  unit-time
tasks  with  deadlines  and  penalties  for  a  single  processor.   In  this  example,  the
greedy algorithm selects, in order, tasksa
1
,a
2
,a
3
,anda
4
, then rejectsa
5
(because
N
4
.
f
a
1
;a
2
;a
3
;a
4
;a
5
g
/D5)anda
6
(becauseN
4
.
f
a
1
;a
2
;a
3
;a
4
;a
6
g
/D5), and
finally acceptsa
7
. The final optimal schedule is
ha
2
;a
4
;a
1
;a
3
;a
7
;a
5
;a
6
i;
which has a total penalty incurred ofw
5
Cw
6
D50.
Exercises
16.5-1
Solve the instance of the scheduling problem given in Figure 16.7, but with each
penaltyw
i
replaced by80w
i
.
16.5-2
Show how to use property 2 of Lemma 16.12 to determine in timeO.
j
A
j
/whether
or not a given setAof tasks is independent.
Problems
16-1  Coin changing
Consider the problem of making change forncents using the fewest number of
coins. Assume that each coin’s value is an integer.
a.Describe  a  greedy  algorithm  to  make  change  consisting  of  quarters,  dimes,
nickels, and pennies. Prove that your algorithm yields an optimal solution.

Problems for Chapter 16447
b.Suppose that the available coins are in the denominations that are powers ofc,
i.e., the denominations arec
0
;c
1
;:::;c
k
for some integersc>1andk1.
Show that the greedy algorithm always yields an optimal solution.
c.Give a set of coin denominations for which the greedy algorithm does not yield
an optimal solution.  Your set should include a penny so that there is a solution
for every value ofn.
d.Give anO.nk/-time algorithm that makes change for any set ofkdifferent coin
denominations, assuming that one of the coins is a penny.
16-2  Scheduling to minimize average completion time
Suppose  you  are  given  a  setSD
f
a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
g
of  tasks,  where  taska
i
re-
quiresp
i
units of processing time to complete, once it has started.  You have one
computer on which to run these tasks, and the computer can run only one task at a
time. Letc
i
be thecompletion timeof taska
i
, that is, the time at which taska
i
com-
pletes processing.  Your goal is to minimize the average completion time, that is,
to minimize.1=n/
P
n
iD1
c
i
.  For example, suppose there are two tasks,a
1
anda
2
,
withp
1
D3andp
2
D5, and consider the schedule in whicha
2
runs first, followed
bya
1
.Thenc
2
D5,c
1
D8, and the average completion time is.5C8/=2D6:5.
If taska
1
runs first, however, thenc
1
D3,c
2
D8, and the average completion
time is.3C8/=2D5:5.
a.Give an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the average com-
pletion time. Each task must run non-preemptively, that is, once taska
i
starts, it
must run continuously forp
i
units of time. Prove that your algorithm minimizes
the average completion time, and state the running time of your algorithm.
b.Suppose  now  that  the  tasks  are  not  all  available  at  once.   That  is,  each  task
cannot start until itsrelease timer
i
. Suppose also that we allowpreemption,so
that a task can be suspended and restarted at a later time. For example, a taska
i
with processing  timep
i
D6and release timer
i
D1might start running at
time 1 and be preempted  at time 4.   It might  then  resume  at time 10 but  be
preempted at time 11, and it might finally resume at time 13 and complete at
time 15. Taska
i
has run for a total of 6 time units, but its running time has been
divided into three pieces.   In this scenario,a
i
’s completion  time is15.Give
an algorithm that schedules the tasks so as to minimize the average completion
time in this new  scenario.   Prove that  your algorithm  minimizes  the average
completion time, and state the running time of your algorithm.

448Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
16-3  Acyclic subgraphs
a.Theincidence matrixfor an undirected graphGD.V; E/is a
j
V
j
	
j
E
j
ma-
trixMsuch thatM
e
D1if edgeeis incident on vertex,andM
e
D0other-
wise.  Argue that a set of columns ofMis linearly independent over the field
of integers modulo 2 if and only if the corresponding  set of edges is acyclic.
Then, use the result of Exercise 16.4-2 to provide an alternate proof that.E;/
of part (a) is a matroid.
b.Suppose  that  we  associate  a  nonnegative  weightw.e/with  each  edge  in  an
undirected graphGD.V; E/.  Give an efficient algorithm to find an acyclic
subset ofEof maximum total weight.
c.LetG.V; E/be an arbitrary directed graph, and let.E;/be defined so that
A2if and only ifAdoes not contain any directed cycles.  Give an example
of a directed graphGsuch that the associated system.E;/is not a matroid.
Specify which defining condition for a matroid fails to hold.
d.Theincidence matrixfor a directed graphGD.V; E/with no self-loops is a
j
V
j
	
j
E
j
matrixMsuch thatM
e
D1if edgeeleaves vertex,M
e
D1if
edgeeenters vertex,andM
e
D0otherwise.  Argue that if a set of columns
ofMis  linearly  independent,  then  the  corresponding  set  of  edges  does  not
contain a directed cycle.
e.Exercise 16.4-2 tells us that the set of linearly independent sets of columns of
any matrixMforms a matroid.  Explain carefully why the results of parts (d)
and  (e)  are  not  contradictory.   How can  there  fail  to be  a perfect  correspon-
dence between the notion of a set of edges being acyclic and the notion of the
associated set of columns of the incidence matrix being linearly independent?
16-4  Scheduling variations
Consider the following algorithm for the problem from Section 16.5 of scheduling
unit-time tasks with deadlines and penalties. Let allntime slots be initially empty,
where time slotiis the unit-length slot of time that finishes at timei. We consider
the tasks in order of monotonically decreasing penalty. When considering taska
j
,
if there exists a time slot at or beforea
j
’s deadlined
j
that is still empty, assigna
j
to the latest such slot, filling it.  If there is no such slot, assign taska
j
to the latest
of the as yet unfilled slots.
a.Argue that this algorithm always gives an optimal answer.
b.Use the fast disjoint-set forest presented in Section 21.3 to implement the algo-
rithm efficiently. Assume that the set of input tasks has already been sorted into

Problems for Chapter 16449
monotonically decreasing order by penalty.  Analyze the running time of your
implementation.
16-5  Off-line caching
Modern computers use a cache to store a small amount of data in a fast memory.
Even though a program may access large amounts of data, by storing a small subset
of the main memory in thecache—a small but faster memory—overall access time
can greatly decrease.   When a computer  program  executes,  it makes a sequence
hr
1
;r
2
;:::;r
n
iofnmemory requests, where each request is for a particular data
element.   For  example,  a  program  that  accesses4distinct  elements
f
a; b; c; d
g
might make the sequence of requestshd; b; d; b; d; a; c; d; b; a; c; bi.Letkbe the
size of the cache. When the cache containskelements and the program requests the
.kC1/st element, the system must decide, for this and each subsequent request,
whichkelements to keep in the cache.  More precisely,  for each requestr
i
,the
cache-management algorithm checks whether elementr
i
is already in the cache. If
it is, then we have acache hit;  otherwise, we have acache miss.  Upon a cache
miss, the system retrievesr
i
from the main memory, and the cache-management
algorithm must decide whether to keepr
i
in the cache. If it decides to keepr
i
and
the cache already holdskelements, then it must evict one element to make room
forr
i
.  The cache-management algorithm evicts data with the goal of minimizing
the number of cache misses over the entire sequence of requests.
Typically,  caching is an on-line problem.  That is, we have to make decisions
about which data to keep in the cache without knowing the future requests.  Here,
however, we consider the off-line version of this problem, in which we are given
in advance the entire sequence ofnrequests and the cache sizek, and we wish to
minimize the total number of cache misses.
We can solve this off-line problem by a greedy strategy calledfurthest-in-future,
which  chooses  to  evict  the  item  in  the  cache  whose  next  access  in  the  request
sequence comes furthest in the future.
a.Write pseudocode for a cache manager that uses the furthest-in-future strategy.
The input should be a sequencehr
1
;r
2
;:::;r
n
iof requests and a cache sizek,
and the output should be a sequence of decisions about which data element (if
any) to evict upon each request. What is the running time of your algorithm?
b.Show that the off-line caching problem exhibits optimal substructure.
c.Prove that furthest-in-future produces the minimum possible number of cache
misses.

450Chapter 16Greedy Algorithms
Chapter notes
Much more material on greedy algorithms and matroids can be found in Lawler
[224] and Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [271].
The greedy algorithm first appeared in the combinatorial optimization literature
in a 1971 article by Edmonds [101], though the theory of matroids dates back to
a 1935 article by Whitney [355].
Our proof of the correctness  of the greedy algorithm for the activity-selection
problem is based on that of Gavril [131].  The task-scheduling problem is studied
in Lawler [224]; Horowitz, Sahni, and Rajasekaran [181]; and Brassard and Bratley
[54].
Huffman codes were invented in 1952 [185]; Lelewer and Hirschberg [231] sur-
veys data-compression techniques known as of 1987.
An extension of matroid theory to greedoid theory was pioneered by Korte and
Lov ́asz [216, 217, 218, 219], who greatly generalize the theory presented here.

17Amortized Analysis
In anamortized analysis, we average the time required to perform a sequence of
data-structure operations over all the operations performed. With amortized analy-
sis, we can show that the average cost of an operation is small, if we average over a
sequence of operations, even though a single operation within the sequence might
be expensive.  Amortized analysis differs from average-case analysis in that prob-
ability is not involved; an amortized analysis guarantees theaverage performance
of each operation in the worst case.
The first three sections of this chapter cover the three most common techniques
used in amortized analysis.  Section 17.1 starts with aggregate analysis, in which
we determine an upper boundT .n/on the total cost of a sequence ofnoperations.
The average cost per operation is thenT .n/=n.  We take the average cost as the
amortized cost of each operation,  so that all operations have the same amortized
cost.
Section 17.2 covers the accounting method, in which we determine an amortized
cost of each operation. When there is more than one type of operation, each type of
operation may have a different amortized cost. The accounting method overcharges
some operations early in the sequence, storing the overcharge as “prepaid credit”
on specific objects in the data structure.  Later in the sequence, the credit pays for
operations that are charged less than they actually cost.
Section 17.3 discusses the potential method, which is like the accounting method
in that we determine the amortized cost of each operation and may overcharge op-
erations early on to compensate for undercharges later. The potential method main-
tains the credit as the “potential energy” of the data structure as a whole instead of
associating the credit with individual objects within the data structure.
We  shall  use  two  examples  to  examine  these  three  methods.   One  is  a  stack
with the additional operation M
ULTIPOP, which pops several objects at once. The
other is a binary counter that counts up from0by means of the single operation
I
NCREMENT.

452Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
While  reading  this  chapter,  bear  in  mind  that  the  charges  assigned  during  an
amortized  analysis  are  for  analysis  purposes  only.   They  need  not—and  should
not—appear in the code.  If, for example, we assign a credit to an objectxwhen
using the accounting method, we have no need to assign an appropriate amount to
some attribute, such asx:credit, in the code.
When we perform an amortized analysis, we often gain insight into a particular
data structure,  and this insight can help us optimize the design.  In Section 17.4,
for example, we shall use the potential method to analyze a dynamically expanding
and contracting table.
17.1  Aggregate analysis
Inaggregate analysis,  we show that for alln,  a sequence  ofnoperations  takes
worst-casetimeT .n/in total.  In the worst case,  the average cost,  oramortized
cost, per operation is thereforeT .n/=n.  Note that this amortized cost applies to
each operation,  even when there are several types of operations in the sequence.
The other two methods we shall study in this chapter, the accounting method and
the  potential  method,  may  assign  different  amortized  costs  to  different  types  of
operations.
Stack operations
In our first example of aggregate analysis, we analyze stacks that have been aug-
mented with a new operation.  Section 10.1 presented the two fundamental stack
operations, each of which takesO.1/time:
P
USH.S; x/pushes objectxonto stackS.
P
OP.S /pops the top of stackSand returns the popped object.  Calling POPon an
empty stack generates an error.
Since each of these operations runs inO.1/time, let us consider the cost of each
to be1. The total cost of a sequence ofnP
USHand POPoperations is thereforen,
and the actual running time fornoperations is therefore‚.n/.
Now we add the stack operation M
ULTIPOP.S; k/, which removes thektop ob-
jects of stackS, popping the entire stack if the stack contains fewer thankobjects.
Of course, we assume thatkis positive; otherwise the M
ULTIPOPoperation leaves
the stack unchanged.  In the following pseudocode, the operation S
TAC K-EMPTY
returnsTRUEif there are no objects currently on the stack, andFALSEotherwise.

17.1Aggregate analysis453
23
17
6
39
10
47
(a)
top
10
47
(b)
top
(c)
Figure 17.1The action of MULTIPOPon a stackS, shown initially in(a).Thetop4objects are
popped by M
ULTIPOP.S; 4/, whose result is shown in(b).  The next operation is MULTIPOP.S; 7/,
which empties the stack—shown in(c)—since there were fewer than7objects remaining.
MULTIPOP.S; k/
1whilenot S
TAC K-EMPTY.S /andk>0
2P
OP.S /
3kDk1
Figure 17.1 shows an example of M
ULTIPOP.
What  is  the  running  time  of  M
ULTIPOP.S; k/on  a  stack  ofsobjects?   The
actual running time is linear in the number of P
OPoperations actually executed,
and thus we can analyze  M
ULTIPOPin terms of the abstract costs of1each for
P
USHand POP. The number of iterations of thewhileloop is the number min.s; k/
of objects popped off the stack. Each iteration of the loop makes one call to P
OPin
line 2. Thus, the total cost of M
ULTIPOPis min.s; k/, and the actual running time
is a linear function of this cost.
Let us analyze a sequence ofnP
USH,POP,andMULTIPOPoperations on an ini-
tially empty stack.  The worst-case cost of a M
ULTIPOPoperation in the sequence
isO.n/, since the stack size is at mostn. The worst-case time of any stack opera-
tion is thereforeO.n/, and hence a sequence ofnoperations costsO.n
2
/,sincewe
may haveO.n/M
ULTIPOPoperations costingO.n/each.  Although this analysis
is correct, theO.n
2
/result, which we obtained by considering the worst-case cost
of each operation individually, is not tight.
Using aggregate analysis, we can obtain a better upper bound that considers the
entire sequence ofnoperations.  In fact, although a single  M
ULTIPOPoperation
can be expensive, any sequence ofnP
USH,POP,andMULTIPOPoperations on an
initially empty stack can cost at mostO.n/. Why? We can pop each object from the
stack at most once for each time we have pushed it onto the stack.  Therefore, the
number of times that P
OPcan be called on a nonempty stack, including calls within
M
ULTIPOP, is at most the number of PUSHoperations, which is at mostn.Forany
value ofn, any sequence ofnP
USH,POP,andMULTIPOPoperations takes a total
ofO.n/time.  The average cost of an operation isO.n/=nDO.1/.  In aggregate

454Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
analysis, we assign the amortized cost of each operation to be the average cost. In
this example, therefore, all three stack operations have an amortized cost ofO.1/.
We emphasize again that although we have just shown that the average cost, and
hence the running time, of a stack operation isO.1/, we did not use probabilistic
reasoning.  We actually showed aworst-casebound ofO.n/on a sequence ofn
operations.  Dividing this total cost bynyielded the average cost per operation, or
the amortized cost.
Incrementing a binary counter
As another example of aggregate analysis, consider the problem of implementing
ak-bit binary counter that counts upward from0. We use an arrayAŒ0 : : k1of
bits, whereA:lengthDk, as the counter.  A binary numberxthat is stored in the
counter has its lowest-order bit inAŒ0and its highest-order bit inAŒk1,sothat
xD
P
k1
iD0
AŒi 2
i
. Initially,xD0, and thusAŒi D0foriD0; 1; : : : ; k1.To
add1(modulo2
k
) to the value in the counter, we use the following procedure.
I
NCREMENT.A/
1iD0
2whilei<A:lengthandAŒi 
==1
3AŒi D0
4iDiC1
5ifi<A:length
6AŒi D1
Figure 17.2 shows what happens to a binary counter as we increment it16times,
starting  with  the  initial  value0and  ending  with  the  value16.   At  the  start  of
each iteration of thewhileloop in lines 2–4, we wish to add a1into positioni.
IfAŒi D1, then adding1flips the bit to0in positioniand yields a carry of1,
to be added into positioniC1on the next iteration of the loop.  Otherwise, the
loop ends, and then, ifi<k, we know thatAŒi D0, so that line 6 adds a1into
positioni, flipping the0to a1.  The cost of each I
NCREMENToperation is linear
in the number of bits flipped.
As with the stack example, a cursory analysis yields a bound that is correct but
not tight. A single execution of I
NCREMENTtakes time‚.k/in the worst case, in
which arrayAcontains all1s.  Thus, a sequence ofnI
NCREMENToperations on
an initially zero counter takes timeO.nk/in the worst case.
We can tighten our analysis to yield a worst-case cost ofO.n/for a sequence ofn
I
NCREMENToperations by observing that not all bits flip each time INCREMENT
is called.  As Figure 17.2 shows,AŒ0does flip each time INCREMENTis called.
The next bit up,AŒ1, flips only every other time:  a sequence ofnI
NCREMENT

17.1Aggregate analysis455
000000000
000000011
000000102
000000113
000001004
000001015
000001106
000001117
000010008
000010019
0000101010
0000101111
0000110012
0000110113
0000111014
0000111115
0001000016
A
[0]
A
[1]
A
[2]
A
[3]
A
[4]
A
[5]
A
[6]
A
[7]
Counter
value
Total
cost
1
3
4
7
8
10
11
15
16
18
19
22
23
25
26
31
0
Figure 17.2An8-bit binary counter as its value goes from0to16by a sequence of16INCREMENT
operations.  Bits that flip to achieve the next value are shaded.  The running cost for flipping bits is
shown at the right. Notice that the total cost is always less than twice the total number of I
NCREMENT
operations.
operations on an initially zero counter causesAŒ1to flip
b
n=2
c
times.  Similarly,
bitAŒ2flips only every fourth time, or
b
n=4
c
times in a sequence ofnI
NCREMENT
operations.   In general,  foriD0; 1; : : : ; k1,bitAŒi flips
b
n=2
i
c
times in a
sequence  ofnI
NCREMENToperations  on an initially  zero counter.   Forik,
bitAŒi does  not  exist,  and  so  it  cannot  flip.   The  total  number  of  flips  in  the
sequence is thus
k1
X
iD0
j
n
2
i
k
<n
1
X
iD0
1
2
i
D2n ;
by equation (A.6). The worst-case time for a sequence ofnI
NCREMENToperations
on an initially zero counter is thereforeO.n/. The average cost of each operation,
and therefore the amortized cost per operation, isO.n/=nDO.1/.

456Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
Exercises
17.1-1
If the set of stack operations  included a M
ULTIPUSHoperation,  which pushesk
items onto the stack, would theO.1/bound on the amortized cost of stack opera-
tions continue to hold?
17.1-2
Show that if a D
ECREMENToperation were included in thek-bit counter example,
noperations could cost as much as‚.nk/time.
17.1-3
Suppose we perform a sequence ofnoperations on a data structure in which theith
operation costsiifiis an exact power of2,and1otherwise. Use aggregate analysis
to determine the amortized cost per operation.
17.2  The accounting method
In theaccounting methodof amortized analysis,  we assign differing  charges to
different  operations,  with some operations  charged  more or  less  than they actu-
ally cost.  We call the amount we charge an operation itsamortized cost.When
an operation’s amortized cost exceeds its actual cost, we assign the difference to
specific objects in the data structure ascredit.  Credit can help pay for later oper-
ations whose amortized cost is less than their actual cost.  Thus, we can view the
amortized cost of an operation as being split between its actual cost and credit that
is either deposited or used up.  Different operations may have different amortized
costs.  This method differs from aggregate analysis,  in which all operations have
the same amortized cost.
We must choose the amortized costs of operations carefully. If we want to show
that  in the worst case the average  cost  per operation  is small by analyzing  with
amortized costs, we must ensure that the total amortized cost of a sequence of oper-
ations provides an upper bound on the total actual cost of the sequence. Moreover,
as in aggregate  analysis,  this  relationship  must  hold  for  all  sequences  of  opera-
tions. If we denote the actual cost of theith operation byc
i
and the amortized cost
of theith operation byyc
i
, we require
n
X
iD1
yc
i

n
X
iD1
c
i
(17.1)
for  all  sequences  ofnoperations.   The  total  credit  stored  in  the  data  structure
is  the  difference  between  the  total  amortized  cost  and  the  total  actual  cost,  or

17.2The accounting method457
P
n
iD1
yc
i

P
n
iD1
c
i
.  By inequality (17.1), the total credit associated with the data
structure must be nonnegative at all times. If we ever were to allow the total credit
to become negative (the result of undercharging early operations with the promise
of repaying  the account  later on),  then the total  amortized costs incurred  at that
time would be below the total actual costs incurred; for the sequence of operations
up to that time, the total amortized cost would not be an upper bound on the total
actual cost. Thus, we must take care that the total credit in the data structure never
becomes negative.
Stack operations
To illustrate the accounting method of amortized analysis, let us return to the stack
example. Recall that the actual costs of the operations were
P
USH1,
P
OP1,
M
ULTIPOPmin.k; s/,
wherekis the argument supplied to M
ULTIPOPandsis the stack size when it is
called. Let us assign the following amortized costs:
P
USH2,
P
OP0,
M
ULTIPOP0.
Note that the amortized cost of M
ULTIPOPis a constant (0), whereas the actual cost
is variable.  Here, all three amortized costs are constant.  In general, the amortized
costs of the operations under consideration may differ from each other, and they
may even differ asymptotically.
We shall  now  show that  we can pay for  any sequence  of  stack  operations  by
charging the amortized costs.  Suppose we use a dollar bill to represent each unit
of cost. We start with an empty stack. Recall the analogy of Section 10.1 between
the stack data structure and a stack of plates in a cafeteria.  When we push a plate
on the stack, we use1dollar to pay the actual cost of the push and are left with a
credit of1dollar (out of the2dollars charged), which we leave on top of the plate.
At any point in time, every plate on the stack has a dollar of credit on it.
The dollar stored on the plate serves as prepayment  for the cost of popping it
from the stack. When we execute a P
OPoperation, we charge the operation nothing
and pay its actual cost using the credit stored in the stack.  To pop a plate, we take
the dollar of credit off the plate and use it to pay the actual cost of the operation.
Thus,  by charging  the  P
USHoperation  a little bit more,  we can charge  the  POP
operation nothing.

458Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
Moreover, we can also charge MULTIPOPoperations nothing.  To pop the first
plate, we take the dollar of credit off the plate and use it to pay the actual cost of a
P
OPoperation. To pop a second plate, we again have a dollar of credit on the plate
to pay for the P
OPoperation,  and so on.  Thus, we have always charged enough
up front to pay for M
ULTIPOPoperations.  In other words, since each plate on the
stack has1dollar of credit on it, and the stack always has a nonnegative number of
plates, we have ensured that the amount of credit is always nonnegative. Thus, for
anysequence ofnP
USH,POP,andMULTIPOPoperations, the total amortized cost
is an upper bound on the total actual cost.  Since the total amortized cost isO.n/,
so is the total actual cost.
Incrementing a binary counter
As another illustration of the accounting method, we analyze the I
NCREMENTop-
eration on a binary counter that starts at zero.  As we observed earlier, the running
time of this operation is proportional to the number of bits flipped, which we shall
use as our cost for this example.  Let us once again use a dollar bill to represent
each unit of cost (the flipping of a bit in this example).
For the amortized analysis, let us charge an amortized cost of2dollars to set a
bit to1.  When a bit is set, we use1dollar (out of the2dollars charged) to pay
for the actual setting of the bit, and we place the other dollar on the bit as credit to
be used later when we flip the bit back to0.  At any point in time, every1in the
counter has a dollar of credit on it, and thus we can charge nothing to reset a bit
to0; we just pay for the reset with the dollar bill on the bit.
Now we can determine the amortized cost of I
NCREMENT. The cost of resetting
the bits within thewhileloop is paid for by the dollars on the bits that are reset. The
I
NCREMENTprocedure sets at most one bit, in line 6, and therefore the amortized
cost of an I
NCREMENToperation is at most2dollars.  The number of1sinthe
counter never becomes negative, and thus the amount of credit stays nonnegative
at all times. Thus, fornI
NCREMENToperations, the total amortized cost isO.n/,
which bounds the total actual cost.
Exercises
17.2-1
Suppose we perform a sequence of stack operations on a stack whose size never
exceedsk. After everykoperations, we make a copy of the entire stack for backup
purposes.  Show that the cost ofnstack operations,  including copying the stack,
isO.n/by assigning suitable amortized costs to the various stack operations.

17.3The potential method459
17.2-2
Redo Exercise 17.1-3 using an accounting method of analysis.
17.2-3
Suppose we wish not only to increment a counter but also to reset it to zero (i.e.,
make  all  bits  in  it0).   Counting  the  time  to  examine  or  modify  a  bit  as‚.1/,
show how to implement  a counter  as an array of bits so that any sequence  ofn
I
NCREMENTand RESEToperations takes timeO.n/on an initially zero counter.
(Hint:Keep a pointer to the high-order1.)
17.3  The potential method
Instead of representing prepaid work as credit stored with specific objects in the
data structure,  thepotential methodof amortized analysis represents the prepaid
work as “potential  energy,”  or just “potential,”  which can be released to pay for
future operations.   We associate  the potential  with the data structure  as a whole
rather than with specific objects within the data structure.
The potential method works as follows.  We will performnoperations, starting
with an initial data structureD
0
.  For eachiD1;2;:::;n,weletc
i
be the actual
cost of theith operation  andD
i
be the data structure that results after applying
theith operation to data structureD
i1
.Apotential functionˆmaps each data
structureD
i
to a real numberˆ.D
i
/, which is thepotentialassociated with data
structureD
i
.Theamortized costyc
i
of theith operation with respect to potential
functionˆis defined by
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/:(17.2)
The amortized cost of each operation is therefore its actual cost plus the change in
potential due to the operation. By equation (17.2), the total amortized cost of then
operations is
n
X
iD1
yc
i
D
n
X
iD1
.c
i
Cˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
//
D
n
X
iD1
c
i
Cˆ.D
n
/ˆ.D
0
/:(17.3)
The second equality follows from equation (A.9) because theˆ.D
i
/terms tele-
scope.
If we can define a potential functionˆso thatˆ.D
n
/ˆ.D
0
/, then the total
amortized  cost
P
n
iD1
yc
i
gives  an  upper  bound  on  the  total  actual  cost
P
n
iD1
c
i
.

460Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
In  practice,  we do  not  always  know  how  many operations  might  be  performed.
Therefore, if we require thatˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
0
/for alli, then we guarantee, as in
the accounting method, that we pay in advance.  We usually just defineˆ.D
0
/to
be0and then show thatˆ.D
i
/0for alli. (See Exercise 17.3-1 for an easy way
to handle cases in whichˆ.D
0
/¤0.)
Intuitively, if the potential differenceˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/of theith operation is
positive, then the amortized costyc
i
represents an overcharge to theith operation,
and the potential of the data structure increases.  If the potential difference is neg-
ative, then the amortized cost represents an undercharge to theith operation, and
the decrease in the potential pays for the actual cost of the operation.
The amortized costs defined by equations (17.2) and (17.3) depend on the choice
of the potential functionˆ. Different potential functions may yield different amor-
tized costs yet still be upper bounds on the actual costs.  We often find trade-offs
that we can make in choosing a potential function;  the best potential function to
use depends on the desired time bounds.
Stack operations
To illustrate the potential method, we return once again to the example of the stack
operations P
USH,POP,andMULTIPOP.  We define the potential functionˆon a
stack to be the number of objects in the stack. For the empty stackD
0
with which
we start, we haveˆ.D
0
/D0.  Since the number of objects in the stack is never
negative, the stackD
i
that results after theith operation has nonnegative potential,
and thus
ˆ.D
i
/0
Dˆ.D
0
/:
The total amortized cost ofnoperations with respect toˆtherefore represents an
upper bound on the actual cost.
Let us now compute the amortized costs of the various stack operations. If theith
operation on a stack containingsobjects is a P
USHoperation, then the potential
difference is
ˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/D.sC1/s
D1:
By equation (17.2), the amortized cost of this P
USHoperation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/
D1C1
D2:

17.3The potential method461
Suppose  that  theith  operation  on  the  stack  is  MULTIPOP.S; k/,  which  causes
k
0
Dmin.k; s/objects to be popped off the stack.  The actual cost of the opera-
tion isk
0
, and the potential difference is
ˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/Dk
0
:
Thus, the amortized cost of the M
ULTIPOPoperation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/
Dk
0
k
0
D0:
Similarly, the amortized cost of an ordinary P
OPoperation is0.
The amortized cost of each of the three operations  isO.1/, and thus the total
amortized cost of a sequence ofnoperations isO.n/. Since we have already argued
thatˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
0
/, the total amortized cost ofnoperations is an upper bound
on the total actual cost. The worst-case cost ofnoperations is thereforeO.n/.
Incrementing a binary counter
As another example of the potential method, we again look at incrementing a binary
counter. This time, we define the potential of the counter after theith I
NCREMENT
operation to beb
i
, the number of1s in the counter after theith operation.
Let us compute the amortized cost of an I
NCREMENToperation.  Suppose that
theith  I
NCREMENToperation  resetst
i
bits.   The actual  cost  of the operation  is
therefore at mostt
i
C1, since in addition to resettingt
i
bits, it sets at most one
bit to1.Ifb
i
D0, then theith operation resets allkbits, and sob
i1
Dt
i
Dk.
Ifb
i
>0,thenb
i
Db
i1
t
i
C1.  In either case,b
i
b
i1
t
i
C1,andthe
potential difference is
ˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/.b
i1
t
i
C1/b
i1
D1t
i
:
The amortized cost is therefore
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
i1
/
.t
i
C1/C.1t
i
/
D2:
If the counter starts at zero, thenˆ.D
0
/D0.Sinceˆ.D
i
/0for alli, the total
amortized cost of a sequence ofnI
NCREMENToperations is an upper bound on the
total actual cost, and so the worst-case cost ofnI
NCREMENToperations isO.n/.
The potential  method gives us an easy way to analyze the counter  even when
it does not start at zero.  The counter starts withb
0
1s, and afternINCREMENT

462Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
operations it hasb
n
1s, where0b
0
;b
n
k. (Recall thatkis the number of bits
in the counter.) We can rewrite equation (17.3) as
n
X
iD1
c
i
D
n
X
iD1
yc
i
ˆ.D
n
/Cˆ.D
0
/:(17.4)
We haveyc
i
2for all1in.Sinceˆ.D
0
/Db
0
andˆ.D
n
/Db
n
, the total
actual cost ofnI
NCREMENToperations is
n
X
iD1
c
i

n
X
iD1
2b
n
Cb
0
D2nb
n
Cb
0
:
Note in particular that sinceb
0
k, as long askDO.n/, the total actual cost
isO.n/. In other words, if we execute at leastnD.k/I
NCREMENToperations,
the total actual cost isO.n/, no matter what initial value the counter contains.
Exercises
17.3-1
Suppose we have a potential functionˆsuch thatˆ.D
i
/ˆ.D
0
/for alli,but
ˆ.D
0
/¤0. Show that there exists a potential functionˆ
0
such thatˆ
0
.D
0
/D0,
ˆ
0
.D
i
/0for alli1, and the amortized costs usingˆ
0
are the same as the
amortized costs usingˆ.
17.3-2
Redo Exercise 17.1-3 using a potential method of analysis.
17.3-3
Consider an ordinary binary min-heap data structure withnelements supporting
the instructions  I
NSERTand EXTRACT-MINinO.lgn/worst-case time.  Give a
potential  functionˆsuch  that  the amortized  cost  of  I
NSERTisO.lgn/and the
amortized cost of E
XTRACT-MINisO.1/, and show that it works.
17.3-4
What  is  the  total  cost  of  executingnof  the  stack  operations  P
USH,POP,and
M
ULTIPOP,  assuming  that  the  stack  begins  withs
0
objects  and  finishes  withs
n
objects?
17.3-5
Suppose  that  a  counter  begins  at  a  number  withb1s  in  its  binary  representa-
tion, rather than at0.  Show that the cost of performingnI
NCREMENToperations
isO
.n/ifnD.b/.(Do not assume thatbis constant.)

17.4Dynamic tables463
17.3-6
Show how to implement a queue with two ordinary stacks (Exercise 10.1-6) so that
the amortized cost of each E
NQUEUEand each DEQUEUEoperation isO.1/.
17.3-7
Design  a  data  structure  to  support  the  following  two  operations  for  a  dynamic
multisetSof integers, which allows duplicate values:
I
NSERT.S; x/insertsxintoS.
D
ELETE-LARGER-HALF.S /deletes the largest
dj
S
j
=2
e
elements fromS.
Explain how to implement this data structure so that any sequence ofmI
NSERT
and DELETE-LARGER-HALFoperations runs inO.m/time. Your implementation
should also include a way to output the elements ofSinO.
j
S
j
/time.
17.4  Dynamic tables
We do not always know in advance how many objects some applications will store
in a table.  We might allocate space for a table, only to find out later that it is not
enough.  We must then reallocate the table with a larger size and copy all objects
stored in the original table over into the new, larger table. Similarly, if many objects
have been deleted from the table, it may be worthwhile to reallocate the table with
a smaller size. In this section, we study this problem of dynamically expanding and
contracting a table. Using amortized analysis, we shall show that the amortized cost
of insertion and deletion is onlyO.1/, even though the actual cost of an operation
is large when it triggers an expansion or a contraction. Moreover, we shall see how
to guarantee  that  the unused  space  in a dynamic  table  never  exceeds  a constant
fraction of the total space.
We assume that the dynamic table supports the operations T
ABLE-INSERTand
T
ABLE-DELETE.TABLE-INSERTinserts into the table an item that occupies a sin-
gleslot, that is, a space for one item. Likewise, T
ABLE-DELETEremoves an item
from the table, thereby freeing a slot.  The details of the data-structuring  method
used to organize the table are unimportant;  we might use a stack (Section 10.1),
a heap (Chapter 6), or a hash table (Chapter 11).  We might also use an array or
collection of arrays to implement object storage, as we did in Section 10.3.
We shall find it convenient to use a concept introduced in our analysis of hashing
(Chapter  11).   We define theload factor ̨.T /of a nonempty  tableTto be the
number of items stored in the table divided by the size (number  of slots)  of the
table.  We assign an empty table (one with no items) size0, and we define its load
factor to be1. If the load factor of a dynamic table is bounded below by a constant,

464Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
the unused space in the table is never  more than a constant  fraction  of the total
amount of space.
We start by analyzing a dynamic table in which we only insert items.  We then
consider the more general case in which we both insert and delete items.
17.4.1  Table expansion
Let us assume that storage for a table is allocated as an array of slots. A table fills
up when all slots have been used or, equivalently, when its load factor is1.
1
In some
software environments, upon attempting to insert an item into a full table, the only
alternative is to abort with an error.  We shall assume, however, that our software
environment, like many modern ones, provides a memory-management system that
can allocate and free blocks of storage on request.  Thus, upon inserting an item
into a full table, we canexpandthe table by allocating a new table with more slots
than the old table had.  Because we always need the table to reside in contiguous
memory, we must allocate a new array for the larger table and then copy items from
the old table into the new table.
A common heuristic allocates a new table with twice as many slots as the old
one.  If the only table operations are insertions, then the load factor of the table is
always at least1=2, and thus the amount of wasted space never exceeds half the
total space in the table.
In the following  pseudocode,  we assume  thatTis an object  representing  the
table.  The attributeT:tablecontains a pointer to the block of storage representing
the table,T:numcontains the number of items in the table, andT:sizegives the total
number of slots in the table. Initially, the table is empty:T:numDT:sizeD0.
T
ABLE-INSERT.T; x/
1ifT:size
==0
2allocateT:tablewith1slot
3T:sizeD1
4ifT:num
==T:size
5allocatenew-tablewith2T:sizeslots
6insert all items inT:tableintonew-table
7freeT:table
8T:tableDnew-table
9T:sizeD2T:size
10insertxintoT:table
11T:numDT:numC1
1
In some situations, such as an open-address hash table, we may wish to consider a table to be full if
its load factor equals some constant strictly less than1.(SeeExercise17.4-1.)

17.4Dynamic tables465
Notice that we have two “insertion” procedures here:  the TABLE-INSERTproce-
dure itself  and theelementary insertioninto  a table in lines  6 and 10.   We can
analyze the running time of T
ABLE-INSERTin terms of the number of elementary
insertions by assigning a cost of1to each elementary insertion.  We assume that
the actual running time of T
ABLE-INSERTis linear in the time to insert individual
items, so that the overhead for allocating an initial table in line 2 is constant and
the overhead for allocating and freeing storage in lines 5 and 7 is dominated by
the cost of transferring items in line 6.  We call the event in which lines 5–9 are
executed anexpansion.
Let us analyze a sequence ofnT
ABLE-INSERToperations on an initially empty
table. What is the costc
i
of theith operation? If the current table has room for the
new item (or if this is the first operation), thenc
i
D1, since we need only perform
the one elementary insertion in line 10. If the current table is full, however, and an
expansion occurs, thenc
i
Di: the cost is1for the elementary insertion in line 10
plusi1for the items that we must copy from the old table to the new table in
line 6.  If we performnoperations,  the worst-case cost of an operation isO.n/,
which leads to an upper bound ofO.n
2
/on the total running time fornoperations.
This bound is not tight, because we rarely expand the table in the course ofn
T
ABLE-INSERToperations.   Specifically,  theith  operation  causes  an  expansion
only wheni1is an exact power of2.  The amortized cost of an operation is in
factO.1/, as we can show using aggregate analysis.  The cost of theith operation
is
c
i
D
(
iifi1is an exact power of2;
1otherwise:
The total cost ofnT
ABLE-INSERToperations is therefore
n
X
iD1
c
i
nC
blgnc
X
jD0
2
j
<nC2n
D3n ;
because at mostnoperations cost1and the costs of the remaining operations form
a geometric series. Since the total cost ofnT
ABLE-INSERToperations is bounded
by3n, the amortized cost of a single operation is at most3.
By using the accounting method, we can gain some feeling for why the amor-
tized cost of a T
ABLE-INSERToperation should be3.  Intuitively, each item pays
for3elementary  insertions:  inserting  itself  into  the current  table,  moving  itself
when the table  expands,  and  moving another  item  that  has already  been  moved
once when the table expands.  For example, suppose that the size of the table ism
immediately after an expansion.  Then the table holdsm=2items, and it contains

466Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
no credit.  We charge3dollars for each insertion.  The elementary insertion that
occurs immediately costs1dollar.  We place another dollar as credit on the item
inserted. We place the third dollar as credit on one of them=2items already in the
table.  The table will not fill again until we have inserted anotherm=21items,
and thus, by the time the table containsmitems and is full, we will have placed a
dollar on each item to pay to reinsert it during the expansion.
We can use  the  potential  method  to analyze  a sequence  ofnT
ABLE-INSERT
operations, and we shall use it in Section 17.4.2 to design a TABLE-DELETEop-
eration that has anO.1/amortized cost as well.  We start by defining a potential
functionˆthat is0immediately after an expansion but builds to the table size by
the time the table is full, so that we can pay for the next expansion by the potential.
The function
ˆ.T /D2T:numT:size(17.5)
is one possibility.  Immediately after an expansion,  we haveT:numDT:size=2,
and  thusˆ.T /D0,  as  desired.    Immediately  before  an  expansion,  we  have
T:numDT:size,  and thusˆ.T /DT:num,  as desired.   The initial  value of  the
potential is0, and since the table is always at least half full,T:numT:size=2,
which implies thatˆ.T /is always nonnegative.  Thus, the sum of the amortized
costs ofnT
ABLE-INSERToperations gives an upper bound on the sum of the actual
costs.
To analyze the amortized cost of theith T
ABLE-INSERToperation, we letnum
i
denote the number of items stored in the table after theith operation,size
i
denote
the total size of the table after theith operation, andˆ
i
denote the potential after
theith operation. Initially, we havenum
0
D0,size
0
D0,andˆ
0
D0.
If theith T
ABLE-INSERToperation does not trigger an expansion, then we have
size
i
Dsize
i1
and the amortized cost of the operation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ
i
ˆ
i1
D1C.2num
i
size
i
/.2num
i1
size
i1
/
D1C.2num
i
size
i
/.2.num
i
1/size
i
/
D3:
If theith operation does trigger an expansion, then we havesize
i
D2size
i1
and
size
i1
Dnum
i1
Dnum
i
1, which implies thatsize
i
D2.num
i
1/.  Thus,
the amortized cost of the operation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ
i
ˆ
i1
Dnum
i
C.2num
i
size
i
/.2num
i1
size
i1
/
Dnum
i
C.2num
i
2.num
i
1//.2.num
i
1/.num
i
1//
Dnum
i
C2.num
i
1/
D3:

17.4Dynamic tables467
Φ
i
num
i
size
i
08162432
0
8
16
24
32
i
Figure 17.3The effect of a sequence ofnTABLE-INSERToperations on the numbernum
i
of items
in the table, the numbersize
i
of slots in the table, and the potentialˆ
i
D2num
i
size
i
, each
being measured after theith operation.  The thin line showsnum
i
, the dashed line showssize
i
,and
the thick line showsˆ
i
.  Notice that immediately before an expansion, the potential has built up to
the number of items in the table, and therefore it can pay for moving all the items to the new table.
Afterwards, the potential drops to0, but it is immediately increased by2upon inserting the item that
caused the expansion.
Figure  17.3  plots  the  values  ofnum
i
,size
i
,andˆ
i
againsti.   Notice  how  the
potential builds to pay for expanding the table.
17.4.2  Table expansion and contraction
To implement a T
ABLE-DELETEoperation, it is simple enough to remove the spec-
ified item from the table.  In order to limit the amount of wasted space, however,
we might wish tocontractthe table when the load factor becomes too small. Table
contraction is analogous to table expansion: when the number of items in the table
drops too low, we allocate a new, smaller table and then copy the items from the
old table into the new one. We can then free the storage for the old table by return-
ing it to the memory-management system.  Ideally, we would like to preserve two
properties:

the load factor of the dynamic table is bounded below by a positive constant,
and

the amortized cost of a table operation is bounded above by a constant.

468Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
We assume that we measure the cost in terms of elementary insertions and dele-
tions.
You might think that we should double the table size upon inserting an item into
a full table and halve the size when a deleting  an item would cause the table to
become less than half full.  This strategy would guarantee that the load factor of
the table never drops below1=2, but unfortunately, it can cause the amortized cost
of an operation to be quite large.  Consider the following scenario.  We performn
operations on a tableT,wherenis an exact power of2.Thefirstn=2operations are
insertions, which by our previous analysis cost a total of‚.n/.  At the end of this
sequence of insertions,T:numDT:sizeDn=2.  For the secondn=2operations,
we perform the following sequence:
insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, delete, delete, insert, insert, ....
The first insertion causes the table to expand to sizen. The two following deletions
cause the table to contract back to sizen=2.  Two further insertions cause another
expansion, and so forth.  The cost of each expansion and contraction is‚.n/,and
there are‚.n/of them.  Thus, the total cost of thenoperations is‚.n
2
/,making
the amortized cost of an operation‚.n/.
The downside of this strategy is obvious:  after expanding the table, we do not
delete enough items to pay for a contraction.  Likewise, after contracting the table,
we do not insert enough items to pay for an expansion.
We can improve upon this strategy by allowing the load factor of the table to
drop below1=2.  Specifically, we continue to double the table size upon inserting
an item into a full table, but we halve the table size when deleting an item causes
the table to become less than1=4full,  rather than1=2full as before.   The load
factor of the table is therefore bounded below by the constant1=4.
Intuitively,  we would consider a load factor of1=2to be ideal, and the table’s
potential  would  then  be0.   As  the  load  factor  deviates  from1=2,  the  potential
increases so that by the time we expand or contract the table, the table has garnered
sufficient potential to pay for copying all the items into the newly allocated table.
Thus, we will need a potential function that has grown toT:numby the time that
the load factor has either increased to1or decreased to1=4. After either expanding
or contracting the table, the load factor goes back to1=2and the table’s potential
reduces back to0.
We omit the code for T
ABLE-DELETE, since it is analogous to TABLE-INSERT.
For our analysis, we shall assume that whenever the number of items in the table
drops to0, we free the storage for the table. That is, ifT:numD0,thenT:sizeD0.
We can now use the potential  method  to analyze  the cost  of a sequence  ofn
T
ABLE-INSERTand  TABLE-DELETEoperations.   We start  by  defining  a poten-
tial functionˆthat is0immediately after an expansion or contraction and builds
as the load factor increases to1or decreases to1=4.  Let us denote the load fac-

17.4Dynamic tables469
num
i
Φ
i
size
i
081624324048
0
8
16
24
32
i
Figure 17.4The effect of a sequence ofnTABLE-INSERTand TABLE-DELETEoperations on the
numbernum
i
of items in the table, the numbersize
i
of slots in the table, and the potential
ˆ
i
D

2num
i
size
i
if ̨
i
1=2 ;
size
i
=2num
i
if ̨
i
<1=2;
each measured after theith operation.  The thin line showsnum
i
, the dashed line showssize
i
,and
the thick line showsˆ
i
.  Notice that immediately before an expansion, the potential has built up to
the number of items in the table, and therefore it can pay for moving all the items to the new table.
Likewise, immediately before a contraction, the potential has built up to the number of items in the
table.
tor of a nonempty tableTby ̨.T /DT:num=T:size.  Since for an empty table,
T:numDT:sizeD0and ̨.T /D1,wealwayshaveT:numD ̨.T /T:size,
whether the table is empty or not. We shall use as our potential function
ˆ.T /D
(
2T:numT:sizeif ̨.T /1=2 ;
T:size=2T:numif ̨.T / < 1=2 :
(17.6)
Observe that  the potential  of an empty table  is0and that  the  potential  is never
negative.  Thus, the total amortized cost of a sequence of operations with respect
toˆprovides an upper bound on the actual cost of the sequence.
Before proceeding with a precise analysis, we pause to observe some properties
of the potential function, as illustrated in Figure 17.4.  Notice that when the load
factor is1=2, the potential is0. When the load factor is1,wehaveT:sizeDT:num,
which impliesˆ.T /DT:num, and thus the potential can pay for an expansion if
an item is inserted. When the load factor is1=4,wehaveT:sizeD4T:num,which

470Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
impliesˆ.T /DT:num, and thus the potential can pay for a contraction if an item
is deleted.
To analyze  a  sequence  ofnT
ABLE-INSERTand  TABLE-DELETEoperations,
we letc
i
denote the actual cost of theith operation,yc
i
denote its amortized cost
with respect toˆ,num
i
denote the number of items stored in the table after theith
operation,size
i
denote the total size of the table after theith operation, ̨
i
denote
the load factor of the table after theith operation, andˆ
i
denote the potential after
theith operation. Initially,num
0
D0,size
0
D0, ̨
0
D1,andˆ
0
D0.
We start with the case in which theith operation is T
ABLE-INSERT.  The analy-
sis is identical to that for table expansion in Section 17.4.1 if ̨
i1
1=2.Whether
the  table  expands  or  not,  the  amortized  costyc
i
of  the  operation  is  at  most3.
If ̨
i1
<1=2, the table cannot expand as a result of the operation,  since the ta-
ble expands only when ̨
i1
D1.If ̨
i
<1=2as well, then the amortized cost of
theith operation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ
i
ˆ
i1
D1C.size
i
=2num
i
/.size
i1
=2num
i1
/
D1C.size
i
=2num
i
/.size
i
=2.num
i
1//
D0:
If ̨
i1
<1=2but ̨
i
1=2,then
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ
i
ˆ
i1
D1C.2num
i
size
i
/.size
i1
=2num
i1
/
D1C.2.num
i1
C1/size
i1
/.size
i1
=2num
i1
/
D3num
i1

3
2
size
i1
C3
D3 ̨
i1
size
i1

3
2
size
i1
C3
<
3
2
size
i1

3
2
size
i1
C3
D3:
Thus, the amortized cost of a T
ABLE-INSERToperation is at most3.
We now turn to the case in which theith operation is T
ABLE-DELETE.Inthis
case,num
i
Dnum
i1
1.If ̨
i1
<1=2,  then we must consider  whether  the
operation causes the table to contract.  If it does not, thensize
i
Dsize
i1
and the
amortized cost of the operation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ
i
ˆ
i1
D1C.size
i
=2num
i
/.size
i1
=2num
i1
/
D1C.size
i
=2num
i
/.size
i
=2.num
i
C1//
D2:

17.4Dynamic tables471
If ̨
i1
<1=2and theith operation does trigger a contraction, then the actual cost
of the operation isc
i
Dnum
i
C1, since we delete one item and movenum
i
items.
We havesize
i
=2Dsize
i1
=4Dnum
i1
Dnum
i
C1, and the amortized cost of
the operation is
yc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ
i
ˆ
i1
D.num
i
C1/C.size
i
=2num
i
/.size
i1
=2num
i1
/
D.num
i
C1/C..num
i
C1/num
i
/..2num
i
C2/.num
i
C1//
D1:
When theith operation is a T
ABLE-DELETEand ̨
i1
1=2, the amortized cost
is also bounded above by a constant. We leave the analysis as Exercise 17.4-2.
In summary,  since  the amortized  cost  of each operation  is bounded  above by
a constant,  the actual time for any sequence  ofnoperations  on a dynamic table
isO.n/.
Exercises
17.4-1
Suppose  that  we wish  to  implement  a  dynamic,  open-address  hash  table.   Why
might we consider the table to be full when its load factor reaches some value ̨
that is strictly less than1? Describe briefly how to make insertion into a dynamic,
open-address hash table run in such a way that the expected value of the amortized
cost per insertion isO.1/. Why is the expected value of the actual cost per insertion
not necessarilyO.1/for all insertions?
17.4-2
Show  that  if ̨
i1
1=2and  theith  operation  on  a  dynamic  table  is  TABLE-
D
ELETE,  then  the  amortized  cost  of  the  operation  with  respect  to  the  potential
function (17.6) is bounded above by a constant.
17.4-3
Suppose that instead of contracting a table by halving its size when its load factor
drops below1=4, we contract it by multiplying its size by2=3when its load factor
drops below1=3. Using the potential function
ˆ.T /D
j
2T:numT:size
j
;
show that the amortized cost of a T
ABLE-DELETEthat uses this strategy is bounded
above by a constant.

472Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
Problems
17-1  Bit-reversed binary counter
Chapter  30  examines  an  important  algorithm  called  the  fast  Fourier  transform,
or FFT. The first step of the FFT algorithm performs abit-reversal permutationon
an input arrayAŒ0 : : n1whose length isnD2
k
for some nonnegative integerk.
This permutation swaps elements whose indices have binary representations  that
are the reverse of each other.
We can express each indexaas ak-bit sequenceha
k1
;a
k2
;:::;a
0
i,where
aD
P
k1
iD0
a
i
2
i
.Wedefine
rev
k
.ha
k1
;a
k2
;:::;a
0
i/Dha
0
;a
1
;:::;a
k1
iI
thus,
rev
k
.a/D
k1
X
iD0
a
ki1
2
i
:
For  example,  ifnD16(or,  equivalently,kD4),  then  rev
k
.3/D12,since
the4-bit representation  of3is0011,  which when reversed gives1100,the4-bit
representation of12.
a.Given a function rev
k
that runs in‚.k/time, write an algorithm to perform the
bit-reversal permutation on an array of lengthnD2
k
inO.nk/time.
We can use an algorithm based on an amortized analysis to improve the running
time of the bit-reversal permutation.  We maintain a “bit-reversed counter” and a
procedure  B
IT-REVERSED-INCREMENTthat,  when given a bit-reversed-counter
valuea, produces rev
k
.rev
k
.a/C1/.IfkD4, for example, and the bit-reversed
counter starts at0, then successive calls to B
IT-REVERSED-INCREMENTproduce
the sequence
0000; 1000; 0100; 1100; 0010; 1010; : : :D0; 8; 4; 12; 2; 10; : : :  :
b.Assume that the words in your computer storek-bit values and that in unit time,
your computer can manipulate the binary values with operations such as shifting
left  or  right  by  arbitrary  amounts,  bitwise-AND,  bitwise-OR,  etc.   Describe
an implementation of the B
IT-REVERSED-INCREMENTprocedure that allows
the bit-reversal permutation on ann-element array to be performed in a total
ofO.n/time.
c.Suppose that you can shift a word left or right by only one bit in unit time. Is it
still possible to implement anO.n/-time bit-reversal permutation?

Problems for Chapter 17473
17-2  Making binary search dynamic
Binary search of a sorted array takes logarithmic search time, but the time to insert
a  new  element  is  linear  in  the  size  of  the  array.   We  can  improve  the  time  for
insertion by keeping several sorted arrays.
Specifically,  suppose  that  we  wish  to  support  S
EARCHand  INSERTon  a  set
ofnelements.    LetkD
d
lg.nC1/
e
,  and  let  the  binary  representation  ofn
behn
k1
;n
k2
; :::; n
0
i.Wehaveksorted  arraysA
0
;A
1
;:::;A
k1
,  where  for
iD0; 1; : : : ; k1, the length of arrayA
i
is2
i
. Each array is either full or empty,
depending on whethern
i
D1orn
i
D0, respectively.  The total number of ele-
ments held in allkarrays is therefore
P
k1
iD0
n
i
2
i
Dn.  Although each individual
array is sorted, elements in different arrays bear no particular relationship to each
other.
a.Describe how to perform the S
EARCHoperation for this data structure. Analyze
its worst-case running time.
b.Describe  how to perform  the  I
NSERToperation.   Analyze  its worst-case  and
amortized running times.
c.Discuss how to implement D
ELETE.
17-3  Amortized weight-balanced trees
Consider an ordinary binary search tree augmented by adding to each nodexthe
attributex:sizegiving the number of keys stored in the subtree rooted atx.Let ̨
be a constant in the range1=2 ̨<1. We say that a given nodexis ̨-balanced
ifx:left:size ̨x:sizeandx:right:size ̨x:size.   The  tree  as  a  whole
is ̨-balancedif every node in the tree is ̨-balanced.   The following amortized
approach to maintaining weight-balanced trees was suggested by G. Varghese.
a.A1=2-balanced  tree is, in a sense,  as balanced as it can be.  Given a nodex
in an arbitrary binary search tree, show how to rebuild the subtree rooted atx
so that it becomes1=2-balanced. Your algorithm should run in time‚.x:size/,
and it can useO.x:size/auxiliary storage.
b.Show  that  performing  a  search  in  ann-node ̨-balanced  binary  search  tree
takesO.lgn/worst-case time.
For the remainder  of this problem,  assume that the constant ̨is strictly greater
than1=2. Suppose that we implement I
NSERTand DELETEas usual for ann-node
binary search tree, except that after every such operation,  if any node in the tree
is no longer ̨-balanced, then we “rebuild” the subtree rooted at the highest such
node in the tree so that it becomes1=2-balanced.

474Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
We shall analyze this rebuilding scheme using the potential method. For a nodex
in a binary search treeT,wedefine
.x/D
j
x:left:sizex:right:size
j
;
and we define the potential ofTas
ˆ.T /Dc
X
x2TW.x/2
.x/ ;
wherecis a sufficiently large constant that depends on ̨.
c.Argue  that  any  binary  search  tree  has  nonnegative  potential  and  that  a1=2-
balanced tree has potential0.
d.Suppose thatmunits of potential  can pay for  rebuilding  anm-node  subtree.
How large mustcbe in terms of ̨in order for it to takeO.1/amortized time
to rebuild a subtree that is not ̨-balanced?
e.Show that inserting a node into or deleting a node from ann-node ̨-balanced
tree costsO.lgn/amortized time.
17-4  The cost of restructuring red-black trees
There are four basic operations on red-black trees that performstructural modi-
fications:  node insertions, node deletions, rotations, and color changes.  We have
seen that RB-I
NSERTand RB-DELETEuse onlyO.1/rotations, node insertions,
and node deletions to maintain the red-black properties, but they may make many
more color changes.
a.Describe a legal red-black tree withnnodes such that calling RB-I
NSERTto
add the.nC1/st node causes.lgn/color  changes.   Then describe a legal
red-black tree withnnodes for which calling RB-D
ELETEon a particular node
causes.lgn/color changes.
Although the worst-case number of color changes per operation can be logarithmic,
we shall prove that any sequence ofmRB-I
NSERTand RB-DELETEoperations on
an initially empty red-black tree causesO.m/structural modifications in the worst
case. Note that we count each color change as a structural modification.
b.Some of the cases handled by the main loop of the code of both RB-I
NSERT-
F
IXUPand RB-DELETE-FIXUPareterminating: once encountered, they cause
the loop to terminate after a constant number of additional operations. For each
of the cases of RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPand RB-DELETE-FIXUP, specify which are
terminating and which are not. (Hint:Look at Figures 13.5, 13.6, and 13.7.)

Problems for Chapter 17475
We shall  first  analyze  the structural  modifications  when only  insertions  are per-
formed. LetTbe a red-black tree, and defineˆ.T /to be the number of red nodes
inT.  Assume that1unit of potential can pay for the structural modifications per-
formed by any of the three cases of RB-I
NSERT-FIXUP.
c.LetT
0
be the result of applying Case 1 of RB-INSERT-FIXUPtoT. Argue that
ˆ.T
0
/Dˆ.T /1.
d.When we insert a node into a red-black tree using RB-I
NSERT, we can break
the operation  into three parts.   List the structural  modifications  and potential
changes resulting from lines 1–16 of RB-I
NSERT,  from nonterminating cases
of RB-I
NSERT-FIXUP, and from terminating cases of RB-INSERT-FIXUP.
e.Using part (d), argue that the amortized number of structural modifications per-
formed by any call of RB-I
NSERTisO.1/.
We now wish to prove that there areO.m/structural modifications when there are
both insertions and deletions. Let us define, for each nodex,
w.x/D
„
0ifxis red;
1ifxis black and has no red children;
0ifxis black and has one red child;
2ifxis black and has two red children:
Now we redefine the potential of a red-black treeTas
ˆ.T /D
X
x2T
w.x/ ;
and letT
0
be the tree that results from applying any nonterminating case of RB-
I
NSERT-FIXUPor RB-DELETE-FIXUPtoT.
f.Show thatˆ.T
0
/ˆ.T /1for  all  nonterminating  cases  of  RB-INSERT-
F
IXUP. Argue that the amortized number of structural modifications performed
by any call of RB-I
NSERT-FIXUPisO.1/.
g.Show thatˆ.T
0
/ˆ.T /1for all nonterminating  cases of RB-DELETE-
F
IXUP. Argue that the amortized number of structural modifications performed
by any call of RB-D
ELETE-FIXUPisO.1/.
h.Complete the proof that in the worst case, any sequence ofmRB-I
NSERTand
RB-D
ELETEoperations performsO.m/structural modifications.

476Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
17-5  Competitive analysis of self-organizing lists with move-to-front
Aself-organizing listis a linked list ofnelements, in which each element has a
unique key. When we search for an element in the list, we are given a key, and we
want to find an element with that key.
A self-organizing list has two important properties:
1.   To find an element in the list, given its key, we must traverse the list from the
beginning until we encounter the element with the given key. If that element is
thekth element from the start of the list, then the cost to find the element isk.
2.   We may reorder the list elements after any operation, according to a given rule
with a given cost. We may choose any heuristic we like to decide how to reorder
the list.
Assume that we start with a given list ofnelements, and we are given an access
sequence	Dh	
1
;	
2
;:::;	
m
iof keys to find, in order.  The cost of the sequence
is the sum of the costs of the individual accesses in the sequence.
Out of the various possible ways to reorder the list after an operation, this prob-
lem focuses on transposing adjacent list elements—switching their positions in the
list—with a unit cost for each transpose operation.  You will show, by means of a
potential function, that a particular heuristic for reordering the list, move-to-front,
entails a total cost no worse than4times that of any other heuristic for maintaining
the list order—even if the other heuristic knows the access sequence in advance!
We call this type of analysis acompetitive analysis.
For a heuristic H and a given initial ordering of the list, denote the access cost of
sequence	byC
H
.	 /.Letmbe the number of accesses in	.
a.Argue that if heuristic H does not know the access sequence in advance, then
the worst-case cost for H on an access sequence	isC
H
.	 /D.mn/.
With themove-to-frontheuristic, immediately after searching for an elementx,
we movexto the first position on the list (i.e., the front of the list).
Let rank
L
.x/denote the rank of elementxin listL, that is, the position ofxin
listL.  For example, ifxis the fourth element inL,thenrank
L
.x/D4.Letc
i
denote the cost of access	
i
using the move-to-front heuristic, which includes the
cost of finding the element in the list and the cost of moving it to the front of the
list by a series of transpositions of adjacent list elements.
b.Show that if	
i
accesses elementxin listLusing the move-to-front heuristic,
thenc
i
D2rank
L
.x/1.
Now we compare  move-to-front  with  any other  heuristic  H that  processes  an
access sequence according to the two properties above. Heuristic H may transpose

Problems for Chapter 17477
elements in the list in any way it wants, and it might even know the entire access
sequence in advance.
LetL
i
be the list after access	
i
using move-to-front, and letL

i
be the list after
access	
i
using heuristic H.  We denote the cost of access	
i
byc
i
for move-to-
front and byc

i
for heuristic H. Suppose that heuristic H performst

i
transpositions
during access	
i
.
c.In part (b), you showed thatc
i
D2rank
L
i1
.x/1.  Now show thatc

i
D
rank
L

i1
.x/Ct

i
.
We  defi ne  aninversionin  listL
i
as  a  pair  of  elementsyand ́such  thaty
precedes ́inL
i
and ́precedesyin listL

i
. Suppose that listL
i
hasq
i
inversions
after processing the access sequenceh	
1
;	
2
;:::;	
i
i.  Then, we define a potential
functionˆthat mapsL
i
to a real number byˆ.L
i
/D2q
i
. For example, ifL
i
has
the elementshe; c; a; d; biandL

i
has the elementshc; a; b; d; ei,thenL
i
has 5
inversions (.e; c/; .e; a/; .e; d /; .e; b/; .d; b/),  and soˆ.L
i
/D10.  Observe that
ˆ.L
i
/0for alliand that, if move-to-front and heuristic H start with the same
listL
0
,thenˆ.L
0
/D0.
d.Argue that a transposition either increases the potential by2or decreases the
potential by2.
Suppose that  access	
i
finds the elementx.   To understand  how the potential
changes due to	
i
, let us partition the elements other thanxinto four sets, depend-
ing on where they are in the lists just before theith access:

SetAconsists of elements that precedexin bothL
i1
andL

i1
.

SetBconsists of elements that precedexinL
i1
and followxinL

i1
.

SetCconsists of elements that followxinL
i1
and precedexinL

i1
.

SetDconsists of elements that followxin bothL
i1
andL

i1
.
e.Argue that rank
L
i1
.x/D
j
A
j
C
j
B
j
C1and rank
L

i1
.x/D
j
A
j
C
j
C
j
C1.
f.Show that access	
i
causes a change in potential of
ˆ.L
i
/ˆ.L
i1
/2.
j
A
j

j
B
j
Ct

i
/;
where, as before, heuristic H performst

i
transpositions during access	
i
.
Define the amortized costyc
i
of access	
i
byyc
i
Dc
i
Cˆ.L
i
/ˆ.L
i1
/.
g.Show that the amortized costyc
i
of access	
i
is bounded from above by4c

i
.
h.Conclude that the costC
MTF
.	 /of access sequence	with move-to-front is at
most4times the costC
H
.	 /of	with any other heuristic  H, assuming that
both heuristics start with the same list.

478Chapter 17Amortized Analysis
Chapter notes
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] used aggregate analysis to determine the running
time of operations on a disjoint-set forest; we shall analyze this data structure us-
ing the potential method in Chapter 21.  Tarjan [331] surveys the accounting and
potential methods of amortized analysis and presents several applications.  He at-
tributes the accounting method to several authors,  including M. R. Brown, R. E.
Tarjan,  S. Huddleston,  and  K. Mehlhorn.   He attributes  the  potential  method  to
D. D. Sleator. The term “amortized” is due to D. D. Sleator and R. E. Tarjan.
Potential functions are also useful for proving lower bounds for certain types of
problems.  For each configuration of the problem, we define a potential function
that maps the configuration to a real number. Then we determine the potentialˆ
init
of the initial configuration,  the potentialˆ
final
of the final configuration,  and the
maximum change in potentialˆ
max
due to any step.  The number of steps must
therefore be at least
j
ˆ
final
ˆ
init
j
=
j
ˆ
max
j
.  Examples of potential functions to
prove lower bounds in I/O complexity appear in works by Cormen, Sundquist, and
Wisniewski [79]; Floyd [107]; and Aggarwal and Vitter [3].  Krumme, Cybenko,
and Venkataraman [221] applied potential functions to prove lower bounds ongos-
siping:  communicating a unique item from each vertex in a graph to every other
vertex.
The  move-to-front  heuristic  from  Problem  17-5  works  quite  well  in  practice.
Moreover, if we recognize that when we find an element, we can splice it out of its
position in the list and relocate it to the front of the list in constant time, we can
show that the cost of move-to-front is at most twice the cost of any other heuristic
including, again, one that knows the entire access sequence in advance.



V  Advanced Data Structures

Introduction
This part  returns to studying  data structures  that  support  operations  on dynamic
sets, but at a more advanced level than Part III.  Two of the chapters, for example,
make extensive use of the amortized analysis techniques we saw in Chapter 17.
Chapter  18  presents  B-trees,  which  are  balanced  search  trees  specifically  de-
signed  to  be  stored  on  disks.    Because  disks  operate  much  more  slowly  than
random-access memory, we measure the performance of B-trees not only by how
much computing time the dynamic-set operations consume but also by how many
disk accesses they perform. For each B-tree operation, the number of disk accesses
increases with the height of the B-tree, but B-tree operations keep the height low.
Chapter 19 gives an implementation  of a mergeable heap,  which supports the
operations I
NSERT,MINIMUM,EXTRACT-MIN,andUNION.
1
The UNIONoper-
ation unites, or merges, two heaps.  Fibonacci heaps—the data structure in Chap-
ter 19—also support the operations D
ELETEand DECREASE-KEY.  We use amor-
tized  time  bounds  to  measure  the  performance  of  Fibonacci  heaps.   The opera-
tions I
NSERT,MINIMUM,andUNIONtake onlyO.1/actual and amortized time
on Fibonacci heaps, and the operations E
XTRACT-MINand DELETEtakeO.lgn/
amortized time.  The most significant advantage of Fibonacci heaps,  however, is
that D
ECREASE-KEYtakes onlyO.1/amortized time.  Because the DECREASE-
1
As in Problem 10-2, we have defined a mergeable heap to support MINIMUMand EXTRACT-MIN,
and so we can also refer to it as amergeable min-heap.  Alternatively, if it supported M
AXIMUM
and EXTRACT-MAX, it would be amergeable max-heap.  Unless we specify otherwise, mergeable
heaps will be by default mergeable min-heaps.

482Part V    Advanced Data Structures
KEYoperation takes constant amortized time, Fibonacci heaps are key components
of some of the asymptotically fastest algorithms to date for graph problems.
Noting that we can beat the.nlgn/lower bound for sorting when the keys
are integers in a restricted range,  Chapter 20 asks whether we can design a data
structure  that  supports  the  dynamic-set  operations  S
EARCH,INSERT,DELETE,
M
INIMUM,MAXIMUM,SUCCESSOR,andPREDECESSORino.lgn/time when
the keys are integers in a restricted range.  The answer turns out to be that we can,
by using a recursive data structure known as a van Emde Boas tree. If the keys are
unique integers drawn from the set
f
0; 1; 2; : : : ; u1
g
,whereuis an exact power
of2, then van Emde Boas trees support each of the above operations inO.lg lgu/
time.
Finally, Chapter 21 presents data structures for disjoint sets. We have a universe
ofnelements that are partitioned into dynamic sets. Initially, each element belongs
to its own singleton set. The operation U
NIONunites two sets, and the query FIND-
S
ETidentifies  the  unique  set  that  contains  a  given  element  at  the  moment.   By
representing each set as a simple rooted tree, we obtain surprisingly fast operations:
a sequence ofmoperations runs inO.m  ̨.n//time, where ̨.n/is an incredibly
slowly growing function— ̨.n/is at most4in any conceivable application.  The
amortized analysis that proves this time bound is as complex as the data structure
is simple.
The topics covered in this part are by no means the only examples of “advanced”
data structures. Other advanced data structures include the following:

Dynamic trees, introduced by Sleator and Tarjan [319] and discussed by Tarjan
[330],  maintain  a forest  of disjoint  rooted  trees.   Each edge  in each  tree has
a real-valued cost.  Dynamic trees support queries to find parents, roots, edge
costs, and the minimum edge cost on a simple path from a node up to a root.
Trees may be manipulated by cutting edges, updating all edge costs on a simple
path from a node up to a root, linking a root into another tree, and making a
node the root of the tree it appears in.  One implementation of dynamic trees
gives anO.lgn/amortized time bound for each operation; a more complicated
implementation yieldsO.lgn/worst-case time bounds. Dynamic trees are used
in some of the asymptotically fastest network-flow algorithms.

Splay trees,  developed  by Sleator  and  Tarjan [320] and,  again,  discussed  by
Tarjan [330],  are a form of binary search tree on which the standard  search-
tree operations run inO.lgn/amortized time.  One application of splay trees
simplifies dynamic trees.

Persistentdata structures allow queries, and sometimes updates as well, on past
versions of a data structure.  Driscoll, Sarnak, Sleator, and Tarjan [97] present
techniques for making linked data structures persistent with only a small time

Part VAdvanced Data Structures483
and space cost.  Problem 13-1 gives a simple example of a persistent dynamic
set.

As in Chapter 20, several data structures allow a faster implementation of dic-
tionary operations  (I
NSERT,DELETE,andSEARCH) for a restricted universe
of keys. By taking advantage of these restrictions, they are able to achieve bet-
ter worst-case asymptotic running times than comparison-based data structures.
Fredman and Willard introducedfusion trees[115], which were the first data
structure to allow faster dictionary operations when the universe is restricted to
integers.  They showed how to implement these operations inO.lgn=lg lgn/
time.  Several subsequent  data structures,  includingexponential search trees
[16], have also given improved bounds on some or all of the dictionary opera-
tions and are mentioned in the chapter notes throughout this book.

Dynamic graph data structuressupport  various  queries  while  allowing  the
structure of a graph to change through operations that insert or delete vertices
or edges. Examples of the queries that they support include vertex connectivity
[166],  edge connectivity,  minimum spanning  trees [165],  biconnectivity,  and
transitive closure [164].
Chapter notes throughout this book mention additional data structures.

18B-Trees
B-trees are balanced search trees designed to work well on disks or other direct-
access  secondary  storage  devices.   B-trees  are  similar  to  red-black  trees  (Chap-
ter 13), but they are better at minimizing disk I/O operations.  Many database sys-
tems use B-trees, or variants of B-trees, to store information.
B-trees differ from red-black trees in that B-tree nodes may have many children,
from a few to thousands.  That is, the “branching factor” of a B-tree can be quite
large, although it usually depends on characteristics of the disk unit used.  B-trees
are similar to red-black trees in that everyn-node B-tree has heightO.lgn/.The
exact  height  of  a  B-tree  can  be  considerably  less  than  that  of  a  red-black  tree,
however,  because  its branching  factor,  and hence  the  base of  the logarithm  that
expresses  its height,  can be much larger.   Therefore,  we can also use B-trees to
implement many dynamic-set operations in timeO.lgn/.
B-trees generalize binary search trees in a natural manner.  Figure 18.1 shows a
simple B-tree.  If an internal B-tree nodexcontainsx:nkeys, thenxhasx:nC1
children.  The keys in nodexserve as dividing points separating the range of keys
handled  byxintox:nC1subranges,  each  handled  by  one  child  ofx.When
searching  for  a  key  in  a  B-tree,  we  make  an.x:nC1/-way  decision  based  on
comparisons with thex:nkeys stored at nodex. The structure of leaf nodes differs
from that of internal nodes; we will examine these differences in Section 18.1.
Section 18.1 gives a precise definition of B-trees and proves that the height of
a B-tree grows only logarithmically  with the number  of nodes it contains.   Sec-
tion  18.2  describes  how  to  search  for  a  key  and  insert  a  key  into  a  B-tree,  and
Section 18.3 discusses deletion.  Before proceeding, however, we need to ask why
we evaluate data structures designed to work on a disk differently from data struc-
tures designed to work in main random-access memory.
Data structures on secondary storage
Computer  systems  take  advantage  of  various  technologies  that  provide  memory
capacity. Theprimary memory(ormain memory) of a computer system normally

Chapter 18B-Trees485
BCFGJKL
DH
NPRSVWYZ
QTX
M
T:root
Figure 18.1A B-tree whose keys are the consonants of English.  An internal nodexcontaining
x:nkeys hasx:nC1children. All leaves are at the same depth in the tree. The lightly shaded nodes
are examined in a search for the letterR.
plattertrack
arms
read/write
head
spindle
Figure 18.2A typical disk drive.  It comprises one or more platters (two platters are shown here)
that rotate around a spindle. Each platter is read and written with a head at the end of an arm. Arms
rotate around a common pivot axis.  A track is the surface that passes beneath the read/write head
when the head is stationary.
consists of silicon memory chips.  This technology is typically more than an order
of magnitude more expensive per bit stored than magnetic storage technology, such
as tapes or disks.  Most computer systems also havesecondary storagebased on
magnetic disks; the amount of such secondary storage often exceeds the amount of
primary memory by at least two orders of magnitude.
Figure 18.2 shows a typical disk drive.  The drive consists of one or moreplat-
ters, which rotate at a constant speed around a commonspindle.  A magnetizable
material covers the surface of each platter.  The drive reads and writes each platter
by aheadat the end of anarm.  The arms can move their heads toward or away

486Chapter 18B-Trees
from the spindle.  When a given head is stationary, the surface that passes under-
neath it is called atrack.  Multiple platters increase only the disk drive’s capacity
and not its performance.
Although disks are cheaper and have higher capacity than main memory, they are
much, much slower because they have moving mechanical parts.
1
The mechanical
motion has two components: platter rotation and arm movement. As of this writing,
commodity disks rotate at speeds of 5400–15,000 revolutions per minute (RPM).
We typically  see 15,000  RPM speeds  in  server-grade  drives,  7200  RPM speeds
in  drives  for  desktops,  and  5400  RPM  speeds  in  drives  for  laptops.   Although
7200 RPM may seem fast, one rotation takes 8.33 milliseconds,  which is over 5
orders  of  magnitude  longer  than  the 50 nanosecond  access  times (more or less)
commonly found for silicon memory. In other words, if we have to wait a full rota-
tion for a particular item to come under the read/write head, we could access main
memory more than 100,000 times during that span.  On average we have to wait
for only half a rotation, but still, the difference in access times for silicon memory
compared with disks is enormous.  Moving the arms also takes some time.  As of
this writing, average access times for commodity disks are in the range of 8 to 11
milliseconds.
In order  to amortize the time spent  waiting for  mechanical  movements,  disks
access not just one item but several at a time. Information is divided into a number
of equal-sizedpagesof bits that appear consecutively within tracks, and each disk
read or write is of one or more entire pages. For a typical disk, a page might be2
11
to2
14
bytes in length. Once the read/write head is positioned correctly and the disk
has rotated to the beginning of the desired page, reading or writing a magnetic disk
is entirely electronic (aside from the rotation of the disk), and the disk can quickly
read or write large amounts of data.
Often, accessing a page of information and reading it from a disk takes longer
than examining all the information read.  For this reason, in this chapter we shall
look separately at the two principal components of the running time:

the number of disk accesses, and

the CPU (computing) time.
We measure the number of disk accesses in terms of the number of pages of infor-
mation that need to be read from or written to the disk.  We note that disk-access
time  is  not  constant—it  depends  on  the  distance  between  the  current  track  and
the desired track and also on the initial rotational position of the disk.  We shall
1
As of this writing, solid-state drives have recently come onto the consumer market. Although they
are faster than mechanical disk drives, they cost more per gigabyte and have lower capacities than
mechanical disk drives.

Chapter 18B-Trees487
nonetheless use the number of pages read or written as a first-order approximation
of the total time spent accessing the disk.
In a typical B-tree application,  the amount of data handled is so large that all
the data do not fit into main memory at once. The B-tree algorithms copy selected
pages from disk into main memory as needed and write back onto disk the pages
that  have  changed.   B-tree  algorithms  keep  only  a  constant  number  of  pages  in
main memory at any time; thus, the size of main memory does not limit the size of
B-trees that can be handled.
We model disk operations in our pseudocode as follows. Letxbe a pointer to an
object. If the object is currently in the computer’s main memory, then we can refer
to the attributes of the object as usual:x:key, for example. If the object referred to
byxresides on disk, however, then we must perform the operation D
ISK-READ.x/
to read objectxinto main memory before we can refer to its attributes.  (We as-
sume that ifxis already in main memory, then D
ISK-READ.x/requires no disk
accesses; it is a “no-op.”) Similarly, the operation D
ISK-WRITE.x/is used to save
any changes that have been made to the attributes of objectx.  That is, the typical
pattern for working with an object is as follows:
xDa pointer to some object
D
ISK-READ.x/
operations that access and/or modify the attributes ofx
D
ISK-WRITE.x///omitted if no attributes ofxwere changed
other operations that access but do not modify attributes ofx
The system can keep only a limited number of pages in main memory at any one
time. We shall assume that the system flushes from main memory pages no longer
in use; our B-tree algorithms will ignore this issue.
Since in most systems the running time of a B-tree algorithm depends primar-
ily on the number of  D
ISK-READand  DISK-WRITEoperations  it performs,  we
typically  want each of these operations  to read or write as much information  as
possible. Thus, a B-tree node is usually as large as a whole disk page, and this size
limits the number of children a B-tree node can have.
For a large B-tree stored on a disk, we often see branching factors between50
and2000,  depending on the size of a key relative to the size of a page.  A large
branching factor dramatically reduces both the height of the tree and the number of
disk accesses required to find any key. Figure 18.3 shows a B-tree with a branching
factor of1001and height2that can store over one billion keys; nevertheless, since
we can keep the root node permanently in main memory, we can find any key in
this tree by making at most only two disk accesses.

488Chapter 18B-Trees
1000
1001
1000
1001
1000
1001
1000
1001
100010001000
...
1 node,
   1000 keys
1001 nodes,
   1,001,000 keys
1,002,001 nodes,
   1,002,001,000 keys
...
T:root
Figure 18.3A  B-tree of height  2 containing  over  one  billion keys.   Shown inside  each nodex
isx:n, the number of keys inx.  Each internal node and leaf contains 1000 keys.  This B-tree has
1001 nodes at depth 1 and over one million leaves at depth 2.
18.1  Definition of B-trees
To keep things simple, we assume, as we have for binary search trees and red-black
trees,  that  any “satellite  information”  associated  with a key  resides  in the  same
node as the key. In practice, one might actually store with each key just a pointer to
another disk page containing the satellite information for that key. The pseudocode
in this chapter implicitly assumes that the satellite information associated with a
key, or the pointer to such satellite information, travels with the key whenever the
key  is  moved  from  node  to  node.   A  common  variant  on  a  B-tree,  known  as  a
B
C
-tree, stores all the satellite information in the leaves and stores only keys and
child pointers in the internal nodes,  thus maximizing the branching factor of the
internal nodes.
AB-treeTis a rooted tree (whose root isT:root) having the following proper-
ties:
1.   Every nodexhas the following attributes:
a.x:n, the number of keys currently stored in nodex,
b.  thex:nkeys themselves,x:key
1
;x:key
2
;:::;x:key
x:n
, stored in nondecreas-
ing order, so thatx:key
1
x:key
2
x:key
x:n
,
c.x:leaf, a boolean value that is
TRUEifxis a leaf andFALSEifxis an internal
node.
2.   Each internal nodexalso containsx:nC1pointersx:c
1
;x:c
2
;:::;x:c
x:nC1
to
its children.  Leaf nodes have no children, and so theirc
i
attributes are unde-
fined.

18.1Definition of B-trees489
3.  The keysx:key
i
separate the ranges of keys stored in each subtree: ifk
i
is any
key stored in the subtree with rootx:c
i
,then
k
1
x:key
1
k
2
x:key
2
x:key
x:n
k
x:nC1
:
4.  All leaves have the same depth, which is the tree’s heighth.
5.  Nodes have lower and upper bounds on the number of keys they can contain.
We express these bounds in terms of a fixed integert2called theminimum
degreeof the B-tree:
a.  Every node other than the root must have at leastt1keys.  Every internal
node other than the root thus has at leasttchildren.  If the tree is nonempty,
the root must have at least one key.
b.  Every node may contain at most2t1keys.  Therefore, an internal node
may have at most2tchildren. We say that a node isfullif it contains exactly
2t1keys.
2
The simplest B-tree occurs whentD2.  Every internal node then has either2,
3,or4children, and we have a2-3-4 tree. In practice, however, much larger values
oftyield B-trees with smaller height.
The height of a B-tree
The number of disk accesses required for most operations on a B-tree is propor-
tional to the height of the B-tree. We now analyze the worst-case height of a B-tree.
Theorem 18.1
Ifn1, then for anyn-key B-treeTof heighthand minimum degreet2,
hlog
t
nC1
2
:
ProofThe root of a B-treeTcontains at least one key, and all other nodes contain
at leastt1keys.  Thus,T, whose height ish, has at least2nodes at depth1,at
least2tnodes at depth2, at least2t
2
nodes at depth3, and so on, until at depthh
it has at least2t
h1
nodes.  Figure 18.4 illustrates such a tree forhD3. Thus, the
2
Another  common  variant  on a  B-tree,  known  as aB

-tree,  requires  each  internal node  to be  at
least2=3full, rather than at least half full, as a B-tree requires.

490Chapter 18B-Trees
t – 1
t – 1t – 1
...
t
t – 1
t
...
1
t – 1
t – 1t – 1
...
t
t – 1
t – 1t – 1
...
t
t – 1
t
...t – 1
t – 1t – 1
...
t
depth
number
of nodes
32t
2
1
2
01
2
2t
T:root
Figure 18.4A B-tree of height 3 containing a minimum possible number of keys.  Shown inside
each nodexisx:n.
numbernof keys satisfies the inequality
n1C.t1/
h
X
iD1
2t
i1
D1C2.t1/

t
h
1
t1

D2t
h
1:
By simple algebra, we gett
h
.nC1/=2. Taking base-tlogarithms of both sides
proves the theorem.
Here we see the power of B-trees, as compared with red-black trees.  Although
the height of the tree grows asO.lgn/in both cases (recall thattis a constant), for
B-trees the base of the logarithm can be many times larger.  Thus, B-trees save a
factor of about lgtover red-black trees in the number of nodes examined for most
tree operations. Because we usually have to access the disk to examine an arbitrary
node in a tree, B-trees avoid a substantial number of disk accesses.
Exercises
18.1-1
Why don’t we allow a minimum degree oftD1?
18.1-2
Forwhatvaluesoftis the tree of Figure 18.1 a legal B-tree?

18.2Basic operations on B-trees491
18.1-3
Show all legal B-trees of minimum degree2that represent
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5
g
.
18.1-4
As a function of the minimum degreet, what is the maximum number of keys that
can be stored in a B-tree of heighth?
18.1-5
Describe the data structure that would result if each black node in a red-black tree
were to absorb its red children, incorporating their children with its own.
18.2  Basic operations on B-trees
In  this  section,  we  present  the  details  of  the  operations  B-TREE-SEARCH,B-
T
REE-CREATE,andB-TREE-INSERT.   In  these  procedures,  we adopt  two con-
ventions:

The  root  of  the  B-tree  is  always  in  main  memory,  so  that  we  never  need  to
perform a D
ISK-READon the root; we do have to perform a DISK-WRITEof
the root, however, whenever the root node is changed.

Any nodes that are passed as parameters must already have had a DISK-READ
operation performed on them.
The procedures we present are all “one-pass” algorithms that proceed downward
from the root of the tree, without having to back up.
Searching a B-tree
Searching a B-tree is much like searching a binary search tree, except that instead
of making a binary,  or “two-way,”  branching  decision  at each node,  we make a
multiway branching decision according to the number of the node’s children. More
precisely, at each internal nodex,wemakean.x:nC1/-way branching decision.
B-T
REE-SEARCHis a straightforward generalization of the TREE-SEARCHpro-
cedure defined for binary search trees.  B-T
REE-SEARCHtakes as input a pointer
to the root nodexof a subtree and a keykto be searched for in that subtree.  The
top-level call is thus of the form B-T
REE-SEARCH.T:root;k/.Ifkis in the B-tree,
B-T
REE-SEARCHreturns  the ordered  pair.y; i /consisting  of  a nodeyand  an
indexisuch thaty:key
i
Dk. Otherwise, the procedure returnsNIL.

492Chapter 18B-Trees
B-TREE-SEARCH.x; k/
1iD1
2whileix:nandk>x:key
i
3iDiC1
4ifix:nandk
==x:key
i
5return.x; i /
6elseifx:leaf
7return
NIL
8elseDISK-READ.x: c
i
/
9returnB-T
REE-SEARCH.x: c
i
;k/
Using  a  linear-search  procedure,  lines  1–3  find  the  smallest  indexisuch  that
kx:key
i
,  or  else  they  setitox:nC1.   Lines  4–5  check  to  see  whether  we
have now discovered the key, returning if we have. Otherwise, lines 6–9 either ter-
minate the search unsuccessfully (ifxis a leaf) or recurse to search the appropriate
subtree ofx, after performing the necessary D
ISK-READon that child.
Figure 18.1 illustrates the operation of B-T
REE-SEARCH. The procedure exam-
ines the lightly shaded nodes during a search for the keyR.
As in the T
REE-SEARCHprocedure for binary search trees, the nodes encoun-
tered  during  the  recursion  form  a  simple  path  downward  from  the  root  of  the
tree.  The B-T
REE-SEARCHprocedure therefore accessesO.h/DO.log
t
n/disk
pages, wherehis the height of the B-tree andnis the number of keys in the B-tree.
Sincex:n<2t,thewhileloop of lines 2–3 takesO.t/time within each node, and
the total CPU time isO.th/DO.tlog
t
n/.
Creating an empty B-tree
To build a B-treeT,wefirstuseB-T
REE-CREATEto create an empty root node
and then call B-T
REE-INSERTto add new keys.  Both of these procedures use an
auxiliary procedure A
LLOCATE-NODE, which allocates one disk page to be used
as a new node inO.1/time.  We can assume that a node created by A
LLOCATE-
N
ODErequires no DISK-READ, since there is as yet no useful information stored
on the disk for that node.
B-T
REE-CREATE.T /
1xDA
LLOCATE-NODE./
2x:leafD
TRUE
3x:nD0
4D
ISK-WRITE.x/
5T:rootDx
B-T
REE-CREATErequiresO.1/disk operations andO.1/CPU time.

18.2Basic operations on B-trees493
Inserting a key into a B-tree
Inserting a key into a B-tree is significantly more complicated than inserting a key
into a binary search tree. As with binary search trees, we search for the leaf position
at which to insert the new key.  With a B-tree, however, we cannot simply create
a new leaf node and insert it, as the resulting tree would fail to be a valid B-tree.
Instead, we insert the new key into an existing leaf node. Since we cannot insert a
key into a leaf node that is full, we introduce an operation thatsplitsa full nodey
(having2t1keys) around itsmedian keyy:key
t
into two nodes having onlyt1
keys each. The median key moves up intoy’s parent to identify the dividing point
between the two new trees. But ify’s parent is also full, we must split it before we
can insert the new key, and thus we could end up splitting full nodes all the way up
the tree.
As with a binary search tree, we can insert a key into a B-tree in a single pass
down the tree from the root to a leaf. To do so, we do not wait to find out whether
we will actually need to split a full node in order to do the insertion. Instead, as we
travel down the tree searching for the position where the new key belongs, we split
each full node we come to along the way (including the leaf itself). Thus whenever
we want to split a full nodey, we are assured that its parent is not full.
Splitting a node in a B-tree
The procedure B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILDtakes as input anonfullinternal nodex(as-
sumedtobeinmainmemory)andanindexisuch thatx:c
i
(also assumed to be in
main memory) is afullchild ofx.  The procedure then splits this child in two and
adjustsxso that it has an additional child. To split a full root, we will first make the
root a child of a new empty root node, so that we can use B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILD.
The tree thus grows in height by one; splitting is the only means by which the tree
grows.
Figure 18.5 illustrates this process.  We split the full nodeyDx:c
i
about its
median keyS, which moves up intoy’s parent nodex.  Those keys inythat are
greater than the median key move into a new node ́, which becomes a new child
ofx.

494Chapter 18B-Trees
RSTQPUV
NW
......
RQPTUV
NWS
......
xx
T
1
T
1
T
2
T
2
T
3
T
3
T
4
T
4
T
5
T
5
T
6
T
6
T
7
T
7
T
8
T
8
yDx:c
i
yDx:c
i
 ́Dx:c
iC1
x:
key
i

1
x:
key
i

1
x:
key
i
x:
key
i
x:
key
i
C
1
Figure 18.5Splitting a node withtD4.  NodeyDx:c
i
splits into two nodes,yand ́,andthe
median keySofymoves up intoy’s parent.
B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILD.x; i/
1 ́DA
LLOCATE-NODE./
2yDx:c
i
3 ́:leafDy:leaf
4 ́:nDt1
5forjD1tot1
6 ́:key
j
Dy:key
jCt
7ifnoty:leaf
8forjD1tot
9 ́:c
j
Dy:c
jCt
10y:nDt1
11forjDx:nC1downtoiC1
12x:c
jC1
Dx:c
j
13x:c
iC1
D ́
14forjDx:ndowntoi
15x:key
jC1
Dx:key
j
16x:key
i
Dy:key
t
17x:nDx:nC1
18D
ISK-WRITE.y/
19D
ISK-WRITE. ́/
20D
ISK-WRITE.x/
B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILDworks by straightforward “cutting and pasting.” Here,x
is the node being split, andyisx’sith child (set in line 2). Nodeyoriginally has2t
children (2t1keys) but is reduced totchildren (t1keys) by this operation.
Node ́takes thetlargest children (t1keys) fromy,and ́becomes a new child

18.2Basic operations on B-trees495
ofx, positioned just afteryinx’s table of children.  The median key ofymoves
up to become the key inxthat separatesyand ́.
Lines 1–9 create node ́and give it the largestt1keys and correspondingt
children ofy. Line 10 adjusts the key count fory. Finally, lines 11–17 insert ́as
a child ofx, move the median key fromyup toxin order to separateyfrom ́,
and  adjustx’s key  count.   Lines  18–20  write  out  all  modified  disk  pages.   The
CPU time used by B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILDis‚.t /, due to the loops on lines 5–6
and 8–9.  (The other loops run forO.t/iterations.)  The procedure performsO.1/
disk operations.
Inserting a key into a B-tree in a single pass down the tree
We insert a keykinto a B-treeTof heighthin a single pass down the tree, re-
quiringO.h/disk accesses.  The CPU time required isO.th/DO.tlog
t
n/.The
B-T
REE-INSERTprocedure uses B-TREE-SPLIT-CHILDto guarantee that the re-
cursion never descends to a full node.
B-T
REE-INSERT.T; k/
1rDT:root
2ifr:n
==2t1
3sDA
LLOCATE-NODE./
4T:rootDs
5s:leafD
FALSE
6s:nD0
7s:c
1
Dr
8B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILD.s; 1/
9B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULL.s; k/
10elseB-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULL.r; k/
Lines 3–9 handle the case in which the root noderis full:  the root splits and a
new nodes(having two children) becomes the root.  Splitting the root is the only
way to increase the height of a B-tree.  Figure 18.6 illustrates this case.  Unlike a
binary search tree, a B-tree increases in height at the top instead of at the bottom.
The procedure finishes by calling B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULLto insert keykinto
the tree rooted at the nonfull root node.  B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULLrecurses as
necessary down the tree, at all times guaranteeing that the node to which it recurses
is not full by calling B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILDas necessary.
The auxiliary recursive procedure B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULLinserts keykinto
nodex, which is assumed to be nonfull when the procedure is called. The operation
of  B-T
REE-INSERTand  the  recursive  operation  of  B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL
guarantee that this assumption is true.

496Chapter 18B-Trees
T
8
T
7
T
6
T
5
T
4
T
3
T
2
T
1
T
8
T
7
T
6
T
5
T
4
T
3
T
2
T
1
FHLDANPFDALNP
s
H
rr
T:root
T:root
Figure 18.6Splitting the root withtD4.  Root nodersplits in two, and a new root nodesis
created.  The new root contains the median key ofrand has the two halves ofras children.  The
B-tree grows in height by one when the root is split.
B-TREE-INSERT-NONFULL.x; k/
1iDx:n
2ifx:leaf
3whilei1andk<x:key
i
4x:key
iC1
Dx:key
i
5iDi1
6x:key
iC1
Dk
7x:nDx:nC1
8D
ISK-WRITE.x/
9else whilei1andk<x:key
i
10iDi1
11iDiC1
12D
ISK-READ.x: c
i
/
13ifx:c
i
:n==2t1
14B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILD.x; i /
15ifk>x:key
i
16iDiC1
17B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULL.x: c
i
;k/
The B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULLprocedure works as follows. Lines 3–8 handle
the case  in whichxis a leaf  node  by inserting  keykintox.Ifxis not  a leaf
node,  then we must insertkinto the appropriate  leaf node in the subtree rooted
at internal nodex.  In this case, lines 9–11 determine the child ofxto which the
recursion descends.  Line 13 detects whether the recursion would descend to a full
child, in which case line 14 uses B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILDto split that child into two
nonfull children, and lines 15–16 determine which of the two children is now the

18.2Basic operations on B-trees497
correct one to descend to. (Note that there is no need for a DISK-READ.x: c
i
/after
line 16 incrementsi, since the recursion will descend in this case to a child that
was just created by B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILD.)  The net effect of lines 13–16 is thus
to guarantee that the procedure never recurses to a full node. Line 17 then recurses
to insertkinto the appropriate subtree.  Figure 18.7 illustrates the various cases of
inserting into a B-tree.
For a B-tree of heighth,B-T
REE-INSERTperformsO.h/disk accesses, since
onlyO.1/D
ISK-READand  DISK-WRITEoperations  occur  between  calls  to
B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULL.  The total CPU time used isO.th/DO.tlog
t
n/.
Since  B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULLis  tail-recursive,  we  can  alternatively  imple-
ment it as awhileloop, thereby demonstrating that the number of pages that need
to be in main memory at any time isO.1/.
Exercises
18.2-1
Show the results of inserting the keys
F; S; Q; K; C; L; H; T; V; W; M; R; N; P; A; B; X; Y; D; Z; E
in order into an empty B-tree with minimum degree 2.  Draw only the configura-
tions of the tree just before some node must split, and also draw the final configu-
ration.
18.2-2
Explain under what circumstances, if any, redundant D
ISK-READor DISK-WRITE
operations  occur  during  the  course  of  executing  a call  to  B-TREE-INSERT.(A
redundant  D
ISK-READis  a  DISK-READfor  a  page  that  is  already  in  memory.
A redundant D
ISK-WRITEwrites to disk a page of information that is identical to
what is already stored there.)
18.2-3
Explain how to find the minimum key stored in a B-tree and how to find the prede-
cessor of a given key stored in a B-tree.
18.2-4?
Suppose that we insert the keys
f
1;2;:::;n
g
into an empty B-tree with minimum
degree2. How many nodes does the final B-tree have?
18.2-5
Since leaf nodes require no pointers to children, they could conceivably use a dif-
ferent (larger)tvalue than internal nodes for the same disk page size.  Show how
to  modify  the  procedures  for  creating  and  inserting  into  a B-tree  to  handle  this
variation.

498Chapter 18B-Trees
JKNORSTDECAUVYZ
PXMG(a)
JKNORSTDEBAUVYZ
PXMG(b)
C
JKNODEBAUVYZ
PXMG(c)
CRSQ
T
JKNODEBAUVYZ
MG
(d)
CRSQL
P
XT
JKNODEBAUVYZ
MG
(e)
C
RSQL
P
XT
F
Q inserted
L inserted
F inserted
initial tree
B inserted
Figure 18.7Inserting keys into a B-tree. The minimum degreetfor this B-tree is3, so a node can
hold at most5keys.  Nodes that are modified by the insertion process are lightly shaded.(a)The
initial tree for this example.(b)The result of insertingBinto the initial tree; this is a simple insertion
into a leaf node.(c)The result of insertingQinto the previous tree.  The nodeRS T U Vsplits into
two nodes containingRSandUV,thekeyTmoves up to the root, andQis inserted in the leftmost
of  the  two halves  (theRSnode).(d)The  result  of insertingLinto the previous  tree.   The root
splits right away, since it is full, and the B-tree grows in height by one.  ThenLis inserted into the
leaf containingJK.(e)The result of insertingFinto the previous tree.  The nodeABCDEsplits
beforeFis inserted into the rightmost of the two halves (theDEnode).

18.3Deleting a key from a B-tree499
18.2-6
Suppose that we were to implement B-T
REE-SEARCHto use binary search rather
than linear search within each node.  Show that this change makes the CPU time
requiredO.lgn/, independently of howtmight be chosen as a function ofn.
18.2-7
Suppose that disk hardware allows us to choose the size of a disk page arbitrarily,
but that the time it takes to read the disk page isaCbt,whereaandbare specified
constants andtis the minimum degree for a B-tree using pages of the selected size.
Describe how to choosetso as to minimize (approximately) the B-tree search time.
Suggest an optimal value oftfor the case in whichaD5milliseconds andbD10
microseconds.
18.3  Deleting a key from a B-tree
Deletion from a B-tree is analogous to insertion but a little more complicated, be-
cause we can delete a key from any node—not just a leaf—and when we delete a
key from an internal node,  we will have to rearrange the node’s children.  As in
insertion, we must guard against deletion producing a tree whose structure violates
the B-tree properties. Just as we had to ensure that a node didn’t get too big due to
insertion, we must ensure that a node doesn’t get too small during deletion (except
that the root is allowed to have fewer than the minimum numbert1of keys).
Just as a simple insertion algorithm might have to back up if a node on the path
to where the key was to be inserted was full, a simple approach to deletion might
have to back up if a node (other than the root) along the path to where the key is to
be deleted has the minimum number of keys.
The procedure B-T
REE-DELETEdeletes the keykfrom the subtree rooted atx.
We design this procedure to guarantee that whenever it calls itself recursively on a
nodex, the number of keys inxis at least the minimum degreet.  Note that this
condition requires one more key than the minimum required by the usual B-tree
conditions, so that sometimes a key may have to be moved into a child node before
recursion descends to that child. This strengthened condition allows us to delete a
key from the tree in one downward pass without having to “back up” (with one ex-
ception, which we’ll explain).  You should interpret the following specification for
deletion from a B-tree with the understanding that if the root nodexever becomes
an internal  node having no keys (this situation  can occur  in cases 2c and 3b on
pages 501–502), then we deletex,andx’s only childx:c
1
becomes the new root
of the tree, decreasing the height of the tree by one and preserving the property that
the root of the tree contains at least one key (unless the tree is empty).

500Chapter 18B-Trees
JKNODEBAUVYZ
MG
(a)
C
RSQL
P
XT
F
initial tree
JKNODEBAUVYZ
MG
(b)
C
RSQL
P
XT
F deleted: case 1
JKNODEBAUVYZ
G
(c)
C
RSQ
L
P
XT
M deleted: case 2a
JKNODEBAUVYZ
(d)
C
RSQ
L
P
XT
G deleted: case 2c
Figure 18.8Deleting keys from a B-tree. The minimum degree for this B-tree istD3, so a node
(other than the root) cannot have  fewer than 2 keys.   Nodes that are modified are lightly shaded.
(a)The B-tree of Figure 18.7(e).(b)Deletion ofF.  This is case 1:  simple deletion from a leaf.
(c)Deletion ofM. This is case 2a: the predecessorLofMmoves up to takeM’s position.(d)Dele-
tion ofG. This is case 2c: we pushGdown to make nodeDE GJKand then deleteGfrom this leaf
(case 1).
We sketch how deletion works instead of presenting the pseudocode. Figure 18.8
illustrates the various cases of deleting keys from a B-tree.
1.   If the keykis in nodexandxis a leaf, delete the keykfromx.
2.   If the keykis in nodexandxis an internal node, do the following:

18.3Deleting a key from a B-tree501
JKNOEBAUVYZ
(e)
C
RSQ
L
PXT
D deleted: case 3b
JKNOEBAUVYZ
C
RSQ
LPXT
JKNOAUVYZCRSQ
LPXT(f)B deleted: case 3aE
(e′)  tree shrinks
in height
Figure 18.8, continued  (e)Deletion  ofD.   This  is  case  3b:   the  recursion  cannot  descend  to
nodeCLbecause it has only 2 keys, so we pushPdown and merge it withCLandTXto form
CLP TX; then we deleteDfrom a leaf (case 1).(e
0
)After (e), we delete the root and the tree shrinks
in height by one.(f)Deletion ofB.  This is case 3a:Cmoves to fillB’s position andEmoves to
fillC’s position.
a.  If the childythat  precedeskin nodexhas at leasttkeys,  then find the
predecessork
0
ofkin the subtree rooted aty.  Recursively deletek
0
,and
replacekbyk
0
inx.  (We can findk
0
and delete it in a single downward
pass.)
b.  Ifyhas  fewer thantkeys,  then,  symmetrically,  examine  the child ́that
followskin nodex.If ́has at leasttkeys, then find the successork
0
ofkin
the subtree rooted at ́. Recursively deletek
0
, and replacekbyk
0
inx.(We
can findk
0
and delete it in a single downward pass.)
c.  Otherwise, if bothyand ́have onlyt1keys, mergekand all of ́intoy,
so thatxloses bothkand the pointer to ́,andynow contains2t1keys.
Then free ́and recursively deletekfromy.
3.  If the keykis not present  in internal  nodex, determine the rootx:c
i
of the
appropriate  subtree that must containk,ifkis in the tree at all.  Ifx:c
i
has
onlyt1keys, execute step 3a or 3b as necessary to guarantee that we descend
to a node containing at leasttkeys. Then finish by recursing on the appropriate
child ofx.

502Chapter 18B-Trees
a.  Ifx:c
i
has onlyt1keys but has an immediate sibling with at leasttkeys,
givex:c
i
an extra key by moving a key fromxdown intox:c
i
,movinga
key fromx:c
i
’s immediate left or right  sibling up intox, and moving the
appropriate child pointer from the sibling intox:c
i
.
b.  Ifx:c
i
and both ofx:c
i
’s immediate siblings havet1keys, mergex:c
i
with one sibling,  which involves moving a key fromxdown into the new
merged node to become the median key for that node.
Since  most  of  the  keys  in  a  B-tree  are  in  the  leaves,  we  may  expect  that  in
practice, deletion operations are most often used to delete keys from leaves.  The
B-T
REE-DELETEprocedure  then  acts  in  one  downward  pass  through  the  tree,
without  having  to  back  up.   When  deleting  a key  in  an internal  node,  however,
the procedure makes a downward pass through the tree but may have to return to
the node from which the key was deleted to replace the key with its predecessor or
successor (cases 2a and 2b).
Although this procedure  seems complicated,  it involves  onlyO.h/disk oper-
ations for a B-tree of heighth, since onlyO.1/calls to D
ISK-READand DISK-
W
RITEare made between recursive invocations of the procedure.  The CPU time
required isO.th/DO.tlog
t
n/.
Exercises
18.3-1
Show the results of deletingC,P,andV, in order, from the tree of Figure 18.8(f).
18.3-2
Write pseudocode for B-T
REE-DELETE.
Problems
18-1  Stacks on secondary storage
Consider implementing a stack in a computer that has a relatively small amount
of fast primary memory and a relatively large amount of slower disk storage.  The
operations  P
USHand  POPwork  on  single-word  values.   The  stack  we  wish  to
support  can grow to be much larger than can fit in memory,  and thus most of it
must be stored on disk.
A simple, but inefficient,  stack implementation keeps the entire stack on disk.
We maintain in memory a stack pointer, which is the disk address of the top element
on the stack.  If the pointer has valuep, the top element is the.pmodm/th word
on page
b
p=m
c
of the disk, wheremis the number of words per page.

Problems for Chapter 18503
To implement the PUSHoperation, we increment the stack pointer, read the ap-
propriate page into memory from disk, copy the element to be pushed to the ap-
propriate word on the page, and write the page back to disk.  A P
OPoperation is
similar.  We decrement the stack pointer,  read in the appropriate page from disk,
and return the top of the stack.  We need not write back the page, since it was not
modified.
Because  disk  operations  are  relatively  expensive,  we count  two costs  for  any
implementation:  the total number of disk accesses and the total CPU time.  Any
disk access to a page ofmwords incurs charges of one disk access and‚.m/CPU
time.
a.Asymptotically,  what  is  the  worst-case  number  of  disk  accesses  fornstack
operations using this simple implementation? What is the CPU time fornstack
operations?  (Express your answer in terms ofmandnfor this and subsequent
parts.)
Now consider a stack implementation in which we keep one page of the stack in
memory. (We also maintain a small amount of memory to keep track of which page
is currently in memory.) We can perform a stack operation only if the relevant disk
page resides in memory.  If necessary, we can write the page currently in memory
to the disk and read in the new page from the disk to memory.  If the relevant disk
page is already in memory, then no disk accesses are required.
b.What  is the worst-case  number  of  disk accesses  required  fornP
USHopera-
tions? What is the CPU time?
c.What is the worst-case number of disk accesses required fornstack operations?
What is the CPU time?
Suppose that we now implement the stack by keeping two pages in memory (in
addition to a small number of words for bookkeeping).
d.Describe how to manage the stack pages so that the amortized number of disk
accesses for any stack operation isO.1=m/and the amortized CPU time for
any stack operation isO.1/.
18-2  Joining and splitting 2-3-4 trees
Thejoinoperation takes two dynamic setsS
0
andS
00
andanelementxsuch that
for anyx
0
2S
0
andx
00
2S
00
,wehavex
0
:key<x:key<x
00
:key.  It returns a set
SDS
0
[
f
x
g
[S
00
.Thesplitoperation is like an “inverse” join: given a dynamic
setSand an elementx2S,  it creates  a setS
0
that consists  of all elements  in
S
f
x
g
whose keys are less thanx:keyand a setS
00
that consists of all elements
inS
f
x
g
whose  keys  are  greater  thanx:key.   In this  problem,  we investigate

504Chapter 18B-Trees
how to implement these operations on 2-3-4 trees. We assume for convenience that
elements consist only of keys and that all key values are distinct.
a.Show how to maintain, for every nodexof a 2-3-4 tree, the height of the subtree
rooted atxas an attributex:height.  Make sure that your implementation does
not affect the asymptotic running times of searching, insertion, and deletion.
b.Show how to implement the join operation.  Given two 2-3-4 treesT
0
andT
00
and a keyk, the join operation should run inO.1C
j
h
0
h
00
j
/time, whereh
0
andh
00
are the heights ofT
0
andT
00
, respectively.
c.Consider the simple pathpfrom the root of a 2-3-4 treeTto a given keyk,
the setS
0
of keys inTthat are less thank, and the setS
00
of keys inTthat are
greater thank. Show thatpbreaksS
0
into a set of trees
f
T
0
0
;T
0
1
;:::;T
0
m
g
and a
set of keys
f
k
0
1
;k
0
2
;:::;k
0
m
g
, where, foriD1;2;:::;m,wehavey<k
0
i
< ́
for any keysy2T
0
i1
and ́2T
0
i
. What is the relationship between the heights
ofT
0
i1
andT
0
i
? Describe howpbreaksS
00
into sets of trees and keys.
d.Show how to implement  the split  operation  onT.  Use the join operation  to
assemble the keys inS
0
into a single 2-3-4 treeT
0
and the keys inS
00
into a
single 2-3-4 treeT
00
. The running time of the split operation should beO.lgn/,
wherenis the number of keys inT.(Hint:The costs for joining should tele-
scope.)
Chapter notes
Knuth [211], Aho,  Hopcroft,  and Ullman [5], and Sedgewick [306] give further
discussions of balanced-tree schemes and B-trees. Comer [74] provides a compre-
hensive survey of B-trees.  Guibas and Sedgewick [155] discuss the relationships
among various kinds of balanced-tree schemes, including red-black trees and 2-3-4
trees.
In  1970,  J.  E.  Hopcroft  invented  2-3  trees,  a  precursor  to  B-trees  and  2-3-4
trees,  in which every  internal  node has  either  two or  three  children.   Bayer  and
McCreight  [35] introduced  B-trees in 1972;  they did not explain their choice of
name.
Bender, Demaine, and Farach-Colton [40] studied how to make B-trees perform
well  in  the  presence  of  memory-hierarchy  effects.   Theircache-obliviousalgo-
rithms work efficiently  without explicitly  knowing the data transfer sizes within
the memory hierarchy.

19Fibonacci Heaps
The Fibonacci heap data structure serves a dual purpose.  First, it supports a set of
operations that constitutes what is known as a “mergeable heap.”  Second, several
Fibonacci-heap operations run in constant amortized time, which makes this data
structure well suited for applications that invoke these operations frequently.
Mergeable heaps
Amergeable heapis any data structure that supports the following five operations,
in which each element has akey:
M
AKE-HEAP./creates and returns a new heap containing no elements.
I
NSERT.H; x/inserts elementx, whosekeyhas already been filled in, into heapH.
M
INIMUM.H /returns a pointer to the element in heapHwhose key is minimum.
E
XTRACT-MIN.H /deletes the element from heapHwhose key is minimum, re-
turning a pointer to the element.
U
NION.H
1
;H
2
/creates and returns a new heap that contains all the elements of
heapsH
1
andH
2
. HeapsH
1
andH
2
are “destroyed” by this operation.
In addition to the mergeable-heap operations above, Fibonacci heaps also support
the following two operations:
D
ECREASE-KEY.H;x;k/assigns  to  elementxwithin  heapHthe  new  key
valuek, which we assume to be no greater than its current key value.
1
DELETE.H; x/deletes elementxfrom heapH.
1
As  mentioned  in  the  introduction  to  Part  V,  our  default  mergeable  heaps  are  mergeable  min-
heaps,  and  so  the  operations  M
INIMUM,EXTRACT-MIN,andDECREASE-KEYapply.   Alterna-
tively,  we could define amergeable max-heapwith the operations  M
AXIMUM,EXTRACT-MAX,
and I
NCREASE-KEY.

506Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
Binary heapFibonacci heap
Procedure(worst-case)(amortized)
MAKE-HEAP‚.1/‚.1/
I
NSERT‚.lgn/‚.1/
M
INIMUM‚.1/‚.1/
E
XTRACT-MIN‚.lgn/O.lgn/
U
NION‚.n/‚.1/
D
ECREASE-KEY‚.lgn/‚.1/
D
ELETE‚.lgn/O.lgn/
Figure 19.1Running times for operations on two implementations of mergeable heaps. The num-
ber of items in the heap(s) at the time of an operation is denoted byn.
As the table in Figure 19.1 shows, if we don’t need the UNIONoperation, ordi-
nary binary heaps, as used in heapsort (Chapter 6), work fairly well.  Operations
other than  U
NIONrun in worst-case timeO.lgn/on a binary heap.  If we need
to support the U
NIONoperation, however, binary heaps perform poorly.  By con-
catenating the two arrays that hold the binary heaps to be merged and then running
B
UILD-MIN-HEAP(see Section 6.3), the UNIONoperation takes‚.n/time in the
worst case.
Fibonacci  heaps,  on the other  hand,  have better  asymptotic  time bounds  than
binary heaps for the I
NSERT,UNION,andDECREASE-KEYoperations, and they
have the same asymptotic running times for the remaining operations.  Note, how-
ever, that the running times for Fibonacci heaps in Figure 19.1 are amortized time
bounds,  not  worst-case  per-operation  time bounds.   The  U
NIONoperation  takes
only  constant  amortized  time  in  a  Fibonacci  heap,  which  is  significantly  better
than the linear worst-case time required in a binary heap (assuming, of course, that
an amortized time bound suffices).
Fibonacci heaps in theory and practice
From a theoretical standpoint,  Fibonacci heaps are especially desirable when the
number of E
XTRACT-MINand DELETEoperations is small relative to the number
of  other  operations  performed.   This  situation  arises  in  many  applications.   For
example, some algorithms for graph problems may call D
ECREASE-KEYonce per
edge. For dense graphs, which have many edges, the‚.1/amortized time of each
call of D
ECREASE-KEYadds up to a big improvement over the‚.lgn/worst-case
time of binary heaps.  Fast algorithms for problems such as computing minimum
spanning trees (Chapter 23) and finding single-source shortest paths (Chapter 24)
make essential use of Fibonacci heaps.

19.1Structure of Fibonacci heaps507
From  a  practical  point  of  view,  however,  the  constant  factors  and  program-
ming complexity of Fibonacci heaps make them less desirable than ordinary binary
(ork-ary) heaps for most applications, except for certain applications that manage
large amounts of data.  Thus, Fibonacci heaps are predominantly of theoretical in-
terest.  If a much simpler data structure with the same amortized time bounds as
Fibonacci heaps were developed, it would be of practical use as well.
Both binary heaps and Fibonacci heaps are inefficient in how they support the
operation S
EARCH; it can take a while to find an element with a given key. For this
reason, operations such as D
ECREASE-KEYand DELETEthat refer to a given ele-
ment require a pointer to that element as part of their input. As in our discussion of
priority queues in Section 6.5, when we use a mergeable heap in an application, we
often store a handle to the corresponding application object in each mergeable-heap
element, as well as a handle to the corresponding mergeable-heap element in each
application object.  The exact nature of these handles depends on the application
and its implementation.
Like several other data structures that we have seen, Fibonacci heaps are based
on  rooted  trees.   We  represent  each  element  by  a  node  within  a  tree,  and  each
node has akeyattribute.  For the remainder of this chapter, we shall use the term
“node” instead of “element.”  We shall also ignore issues of allocating nodes prior
to insertion and freeing nodes following deletion, assuming instead that the code
calling the heap procedures deals with these details.
Section  19.1  defines  Fibonacci  heaps,  discusses  how  we represent  them,  and
presents  the  potential  function  used  for  their  amortized  analysis.   Section  19.2
shows how to implement the mergeable-heap operations and achieve the amortized
time bounds shown in Figure 19.1.  The remaining two operations,  D
ECREASE-
K
EYand DELETE, form the focus of Section 19.3. Finally, Section 19.4 finishes a
key part of the analysis and also explains the curious name of the data structure.
19.1  Structure of Fibonacci heaps
AFibonacci heapis a collection of rooted trees that aremin-heap ordered.That
is, each tree obeys themin-heap property: the key of a node is greater than or equal
to the key of its parent. Figure 19.2(a) shows an example of a Fibonacci heap.
As Figure 19.2(b) shows, each nodexcontains a pointerx:pto its parent and
a pointerx:childto any one of its children.  The children ofxare linked together
in a circular, doubly linked list, which we call thechild listofx.  Each childyin
a child list has pointersy:leftandy:rightthat point toy’s left and right siblings,
respectively.  If nodeyis an only child, theny:leftDy:rightDy.  Siblings may
appear in a child list in any order.

508Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
17
302646
35
24
185238
3
3941
237
17
302646
35
24
185238
3
3941
237
(a)
(b)
H:min
H:min
Figure 19.2  (a)A Fibonacci heap consisting of five min-heap-ordered trees and 14 nodes.  The
dashed line indicates the root list.  The minimum node of the heap is the node containing the key3.
Black nodes are marked. The potential of this particular Fibonacci heap is5C23D11.(b)Amore
complete  representation showing  pointersp(up arrows),child(down  arrows),  andleftandright
(sideways arrows). The remaining figures in this chapter omit these details, since all the information
shown here can be determined from what appears in part (a).
Circular, doubly linked lists (see Section 10.2) have two advantages for use in
Fibonacci heaps.  First, we can insert a node into any location or remove a node
from anywhere in a circular, doubly linked list inO.1/time.  Second, given two
such lists, we can concatenate them (or “splice” them together) into one circular,
doubly linked list inO.1/time.  In the descriptions of Fibonacci heap operations,
we shall refer to these operations informally, letting you fill in the details of their
implementations if you wish.
Each node has two other attributes. We store the number of children in the child
list of nodexinx:degree. The boolean-valued attributex:markindicates whether
nodexhas lost a child since the last timexwas made the child of another node.
Newly created nodes are unmarked, and a nodexbecomes unmarked whenever it
is made the child of another node. Until we look at the D
ECREASE-KEYoperation
in Section 19.3, we will just set allmarkattributes to
FALSE.
We access a given Fibonacci heapHby a pointerH:minto the root of a tree
containing the minimum key; we call this node theminimum nodeof the Fibonacci

19.1Structure of Fibonacci heaps509
heap. If more than one root has a key with the minimum value, then any such root
may serve  as  the  minimum  node.   When  a Fibonacci  heapHis empty,H:min
is
NIL.
The  roots  of  all  the  trees  in  a  Fibonacci  heap  are  linked  together  using  their
leftandrightpointers into a circular, doubly linked list called theroot listof the
Fibonacci heap.  The pointerH:minthus points to the node in the root list whose
key is minimum. Trees may appear in any order within a root list.
We rely  on  one  other  attribute  for  a Fibonacci  heapH:H:n,  the number  of
nodes currently inH.
Potential function
As mentioned,  we shall  use the potential  method of Section 17.3 to analyze the
performance  of  Fibonacci  heap  operations.   For  a  given  Fibonacci  heapH,we
indicate byt.H/the number of trees in the root list ofHand bym.H /the number
of marked nodes inH.  We then define the potentialˆ.H /of Fibonacci heapH
by
ˆ.H /Dt.H/C2m.H/ :(19.1)
(We will gain some intuition for this potential function in Section 19.3.) For exam-
ple, the potential of the Fibonacci heap shown in Figure 19.2 is5C23D11.The
potential of a set of Fibonacci heaps is the sum of the potentials of its constituent
Fibonacci heaps.  We shall assume that a unit of potential can pay for a constant
amount of work, where the constant is sufficiently large to cover the cost of any of
the specific constant-time pieces of work that we might encounter.
We assume that a Fibonacci heap application begins with no heaps.  The initial
potential,  therefore,  is0,  and by equation  (19.1),  the potential  is nonnegative  at
all subsequent times. From equation (17.3), an upper bound on the total amortized
cost provides an upper bound on the total actual cost for the sequence of operations.
Maximum degree
The amortized analyses we shall perform in the remaining sections of this chapter
assume that we know an upper boundD.n/on the maximum degree of any node
in ann-node Fibonacci heap.  We won’t prove it, but when only the mergeable-
heap operations are supported,D.n/
b
lgn
c
. (Problem 19-2(d) asks you to prove
this  property.)   In Sections  19.3 and  19.4,  we shall  show  that  when we support
D
ECREASE-KEYand DELETEas well,D.n/DO.lgn/.

510Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
19.2  Mergeable-heap operations
The mergeable-heap operations on Fibonacci heaps delay work as long as possible.
The various operations have performance trade-offs. For example, we insert a node
by adding  it to the root list,  which takes just constant  time.   If we were to start
with an empty Fibonacci heap and then insertknodes, the Fibonacci heap would
consist  of  just  a  root  list  ofknodes.   The  trade-off  is  that  if  we  then  perform
an E
XTRACT-MINoperation on Fibonacci heapH, after removing the node that
H:minpoints to, we would have to look through each of the remainingk1nodes
in the root list to find the new minimum node.  As long as we have to go through
the entire root list during the E
XTRACT-MINoperation, we also consolidate nodes
into min-heap-ordered trees to reduce the size of the root list. We shall see that, no
matter what the root list looks like before a E
XTRACT-MINoperation,  afterward
each node in the root list has a degree that is unique within the root list, which leads
to a root list of size at mostD.n/C1.
Creating a new Fibonacci heap
To make an empty Fibonacci heap, the M
AKE-FIB-HEAPprocedure allocates and
returns the Fibonacci heap objectH,whereH:nD0andH:minD
NIL;there
are no trees inH.  Becauset.H/D0andm.H /D0, the potential of the empty
Fibonacci  heap isˆ.H /D0.  The amortized cost of M
AKE-FIB-HEAPis thus
equal to itsO.1/actual cost.
Inserting a node
The following procedure inserts nodexinto Fibonacci heapH, assuming that the
node has already been allocated and thatx:keyhas already been filled in.
F
IB-HEAP-INSERT.H; x/
1x:degreeD0
2x:pD
NIL
3x:childDNIL
4x:markDFALSE
5ifH:min==NIL
6create a root list forHcontaining justx
7H:minDx
8elseinsertxintoH’s root list
9ifx:key<H:min:key
10H:minDx
11nDnC1
H:H:

19.2Mergeable-heap operations511
(a)(b)
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721
185238
3941
317
30
2423
26
35
46
7
185238
3941
3
H:minH:min
Figure 19.3Inserting a node into a Fibonacci heap.(a)A Fibonacci heapH.(b)Fibonacci heapH
after inserting the node with key21.  The node becomes its own min-heap-ordered tree and is then
added to the root list, becoming the left sibling of the root.
Lines 1–4 initialize some of the structural attributes of nodex. Line 5 tests to see
whether Fibonacci heapHis empty.  If it is, then lines 6–7 makexbe the only
node inH’s root list and setH:minto point tox.  Otherwise, lines 8–10 insertx
intoH’s root list and updateH:minif necessary.  Finally, line 11 incrementsH:n
to reflect  the  addition  of  the new  node.   Figure  19.3 shows  a node  with key21
inserted into the Fibonacci heap of Figure 19.2.
To determine the amortized cost of F
IB-HEAP-INSERT,letHbe the input Fi-
bonacci heap andH
0
be the resulting Fibonacci heap.  Then,t.H
0
/Dt.H/C1
andm.H
0
/Dm.H /, and the increase in potential is
..t .H /C1/C2 m.H //.t .H /C2 m.H //D1:
Since the actual cost isO.1/, the amortized cost isO.1/C1DO.1/.
Finding the minimum node
The minimum node of a Fibonacci heapHis given by the pointerH:min,sowe
can find the minimum node inO.1/actual time.  Because the potential ofHdoes
not change, the amortized cost of this operation is equal to itsO.1/actual cost.
Uniting two Fibonacci heaps
The following procedure unites Fibonacci heapsH
1
andH
2
, destroyingH
1
andH
2
in the process.  It simply concatenates the root lists ofH
1
andH
2
and then deter-
mines the new minimum node. Afterward, the objects representingH
1
andH
2
will
never be used again.

512Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
FIB-HEAP-UNION.H
1
;H
2
/
1HDM
AKE-FIB-HEAP./
2H:minDH
1
:min
3concatenate the root list ofH
2
with the root list ofH
4if.H
1
:min==NIL/or.H
2
:min¤NILandH
2
:min:key<H
1
:min:key/
5H:minDH
2
:min
6H:nDH
1
:nCH
2
:n
7returnH
Lines 1–3 concatenate the root lists ofH
1
andH
2
into a new root listH.Lines
2, 4, and 5 set the minimum node ofH, and line 6 setsH:nto the total number
of nodes.  Line 7 returns the resulting Fibonacci heapH.AsintheF
IB-HEAP-
I
NSERTprocedure, all roots remain roots.
The change in potential is
ˆ.H /.ˆ.H
1
/Cˆ.H
2
//
D.t .H /C2 m.H //..t .H
1
/C2m.H
1
//C.t .H
2
/C2m.H
2
///
D0;
becauset.H/Dt.H
1
/Ct.H
2
/andm.H /Dm.H
1
/Cm.H
2
/.  The amortized
cost of F
IB-HEAP-UNIONis therefore equal to itsO.1/actual cost.
Extracting the minimum node
The process of extracting the minimum node is the most complicated of the oper-
ations presented in this section. It is also where the delayed work of consolidating
trees in the root list finally occurs.  The following pseudocode extracts the mini-
mum node.  The code assumes for convenience that when a node is removed from
a linked list, pointers remaining in the list are updated, but pointers in the extracted
node  are  left  unchanged.   It  also  calls  the  auxiliary  procedure  C
ONSOLIDATE,
which we shall see shortly.

19.2Mergeable-heap operations513
FIB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN.H /
1 ́DH:min
2if ́¤
NIL
3foreach childxof ́
4addxto the root list ofH
5x:pD
NIL
6remove ́from the root list ofH
7if ́
== ́:right
8H:minD
NIL
9elseH:minD ́:right
10C
ONSOLIDATE.H /
11H:nDH:n1
12return ́
As Figure 19.4 illustrates, F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINworks by first making a root
out of each of the minimum node’s children and removing the minimum node from
the root list. It then consolidates the root list by linking roots of equal degree until
at most one root remains of each degree.
We start in line 1 by saving  a pointer ́to the minimum node;  the procedure
returns this pointer at the end. If ́is
NIL, then Fibonacci heapHis already empty
and we are done.  Otherwise, we delete node ́fromHby making all of ́’s chil-
dren roots ofHin lines 3–5 (putting them into the root list) and removing ́from
the  root  list  in  line  6.   If ́is  its  own right  sibling  after  line  6,  then ́was  the
only node on the root  list and it had no children,  so all that remains is to make
the  Fibonacci  heap  empty  in  line  8  before  returning ́.   Otherwise,  we  set  the
pointerH:mininto the root  list to point  to a root other than ́(in this case, ́’s
right sibling), which is not necessarily going to be the new minimum node when
F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINis done.  Figure 19.4(b) shows the Fibonacci heap of
Figure 19.4(a) after executing line 9.
The next step, in which we reduce the number of trees in the Fibonacci heap, is
consolidatingthe root list ofH, which the call C
ONSOLIDATE.H /accomplishes.
Consolidating the root list consists of repeatedly executing the following steps until
every root in the root list has a distinctdegreevalue:
1.  Find two rootsxandyin the root list with the same degree.  Without loss of
generality, letx:keyy:key.
2.Linkytox: removeyfrom the root list, and makeya child ofxby calling the
F
IB-HEAP-LINKprocedure.  This procedure increments the attributex:degree
and clears the mark ony.

514Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
A
0123
A
0123
A
0123
A
0123
A
0123
A
0123
(c)(d)
(e)
17
30
2423
26
35
46
7
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721
185238
3941
(a)3(b)
(f)
(g)21185238
3941
(h)
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721185238
3941
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721185238
3941
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721185238
3941
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721185238
3941
17
30
24
2326
35
46
721185238
3941
17
30
24
2326
35
46
721185238
3941
w,xw,x
w,x
w,x
w,xw,x
H:minH:min
Figure 19.4The action of FIB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN.(a)A Fibonacci heapH.(b)The situa-
tion after removing the minimum node ́from the root list and adding its children to the root list.
(c)–(e)The arrayAand the trees after each of the first three iterations of theforloop of lines 4–14 of
the procedure C
ONSOLIDATE. The procedure processes the root list by starting at the node pointed
to byH:minand followingrightpointers.  Each part shows the values ofwandxat the end of an
iteration.(f)–(h)The next iteration of theforloop, with the values ofwandxshownattheendof
each iteration of thewhileloop of lines 7–13. Part (f) shows the situation after the first time through
thewhileloop. The node with key23has been linked to the node with key7,whichxnow points to.
In part (g), the node with key17has been linked to the node with key7,whichxstill points to.  In
part (h), the node with key24has been linked to the node with key7. Since no node was previously
pointed to byAŒ3, at the end of theforloop iteration,AŒ3is set to point to the root of the resulting
tree.

19.2Mergeable-heap operations515
A
0123
A
0123
A
0123
A
0123
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721185238
3941
(i)
17
30
2423
26
35
46
721185238
3941
(j)
17
30
2423
26
35
46
738
41
(k)
21
18
52
3917
30
2423
26
35
46
738
41
(l)
21
18
52
39
17
30
2423
26
35
46
738
41
(m)
21
18
52
39
w,xw,x
xw,x
w
H:min
Figure 19.4, continued  (i)–(l)The situation after each of the next four iterations of theforloop.
(m)Fibonacci heapHafter reconstructing the root list from the arrayAand determining the new
H:minpointer.
The procedure  CONSOLIDATEuses an auxiliary arrayAŒ0 : : D.H:n/to keep
track of roots according to their degrees.  IfAŒi Dy,thenyis currently a root
withy:degreeDi. Of course, in order to allocate the array we have to know how
to calculate the upper boundD.H:n/on the maximum degree, but we will see how
to do so in Section 19.4.

516Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
CONSOLIDATE.H /
1letAŒ0 : : D.H:n/beanewarray
2foriD0toD.H:n/
3AŒi D
NIL
4foreach nodewin the root list ofH
5xDw
6dDx:degree
7whileAŒd ¤
NIL
8yDAŒd //another node with the same degree asx
9ifx:key>y:key
10exchangexwithy
11F
IB-HEAP-LINK.H;y;x/
12AŒd D
NIL
13dDdC1
14AŒd Dx
15H:minD
NIL
16foriD0toD.H:n/
17ifAŒi ¤
NIL
18ifH:min==NIL
19create a root list forHcontaining justAŒi 
20H:minDAŒi 
21elseinsertAŒi intoH’s root list
22ifAŒi :key<H:min:key
23H:minDAŒi 
F
IB-HEAP-LINK.H;y;x/
1removeyfrom the root list ofH
2makeya child ofx, incrementingx:degree
3y:markD
FALSE
In detail,  the  CONSOLIDATEprocedure  works as follows.   Lines 1–3 allocate
and initialize the arrayAby making each entry
NIL.Theforloop of lines 4–14
processes each rootwin the root list.  As we link roots together,wmay be linked
to some other node and no longer be a root.  Nevertheless,wis always in a tree
rooted at some nodex, which may or may not bewitself.  Because we want at
most one root with each degree, we look in the arrayAto see whether it contains
a rootywith the same degree asx.  If it does, then we link the rootsxandybut
guaranteeing thatxremains a root after linking.  That is, we linkytoxafter first
exchanging the pointers to the two roots ify’s key is smaller thanx’s key.  After
we linkytox, the degree ofxhas increased by1, and so we continue this process,
linkingxand another root whose degree equalsx’s new degree, until no other root

19.2Mergeable-heap operations517
that we have processed has the same degree asx. We then set the appropriate entry
ofAto point tox, so that as we process roots later on, we have recorded thatxis
the unique root of its degree that we have already processed.  When thisforloop
terminates, at most one root of each degree will remain, and the arrayAwill point
to each remaining root.
Thewhileloop of lines 7–13 repeatedly links the rootxof the tree containing
nodewto another tree whose root has the same degree asx, until no other root has
the same degree. Thiswhileloop maintains the following invariant:
At the start of each iteration of thewhileloop,dDx:degree.
We use this loop invariant as follows:
Initialization:Line 6 ensures that the loop invariant holds the first time we enter
the loop.
Maintenance:In each iteration  of thewhileloop,AŒd points  to some rooty.
BecausedDx:degreeDy:degree, we want to linkxandy.  Whichever of
xandyhas the smaller key becomes the parent of the other as a result of the
link operation, and so lines 9–10 exchange the pointers toxandyif necessary.
Next,  we linkytoxby the call  F
IB-HEAP-LINK.H;y;x/in line 11.   This
call incrementsx:degreebut leavesy:degreeasd. Nodeyis no longer a root,
and so line 12 removes the pointer to it in arrayA.  Because the call of F
IB-
H
EAP-LINKincrements  the value  ofx:degree,  line 13  restores  the invariant
thatdDx:degree.
Termination:We repeat thewhileloop untilAŒd D
NIL, in which case there is
no other root with the same degree asx.
After thewhileloop terminates, we setAŒd toxin line 14 and perform the next
iteration of theforloop.
Figures 19.4(c)–(e) show the arrayAand the resulting trees after the first three
iterations of theforloop of lines 4–14.  In the next iteration of theforloop, three
links occur; their results are shown in Figures 19.4(f)–(h). Figures 19.4(i)–(l) show
the result of the next four iterations of theforloop.
All  that  remains  is  to  clean  up.   Once  theforloop  of  lines  4–14  completes,
line 15 empties the root list, and lines 16–23 reconstruct it from the arrayA.The
resulting Fibonacci heap appears in Figure 19.4(m).  After consolidating the root
list,  F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINfinishes up by decrementingH:nin line 11 and
returning a pointer to the deleted node ́in line 12.
We are now ready to show that the amortized cost of extracting the minimum
node of ann-node Fibonacci heap isO.D.n//.LetHdenote the Fibonacci heap
just prior to the F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINoperation.
We  start  by  accounting  for  the  actual  cost  of  extracting  the  minimum  node.
AnO.D.n//contribution  comes from  F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINprocessing  at

518Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
mostD.n/children  of  the  minimum  node  and  from  the  work  in  lines  2–3  and
16–23 of C
ONSOLIDATE.  It remains to analyze the contribution from theforloop
of lines 4–14 in C
ONSOLIDATE, for which we use an aggregate analysis.  The size
of the root list upon calling C
ONSOLIDATEis at mostD.n/Ct.H/1, since it
consists of the originalt.H/root-list nodes, minus the extracted root node, plus
the children of the extracted node,  which number at mostD.n/.  Within a given
iteration of theforloop of lines 4–14, the number of iterations of thewhileloop of
lines 7–13 depends on the root list. But we know that every time through thewhile
loop, one of the roots is linked to another, and thus the total number of iterations
of thewhileloop over all iterations of theforloop is at most the number of roots
in the root list.  Hence, the total amount of work performed in theforloop is at
most proportional toD.n/Ct.H/.  Thus, the total actual work in extracting the
minimum node isO.D.n/Ct.H//.
The potential before extracting the minimum node ist.H/C2m.H/,andthe
potential afterward is at most.D.n/C1/C2m.H/, since at mostD.n/C1roots
remain and no nodes become marked during the operation.  The amortized cost is
thus at most
O.D.n/Ct.H//C..D.n/C1/C2 m.H //.t .H /C2 m.H //
DO.D.n//CO.t.H//t.H/
DO.D.n// ;
since  we  can  scale  up  the  units  of  potential  to  dominate  the  constant  hidden
inO.t.H//.   Intuitively,  the cost of performing  each  link is paid for by the re-
duction in potential due to the link’s reducing the number of roots by one. We shall
see in Section 19.4 thatD.n/DO.lgn/, so that the amortized cost of extracting
the minimum node isO.lgn/.
Exercises
19.2-1
Show the Fibonacci heap that results from calling F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINon
the Fibonacci heap shown in Figure 19.4(m).
19.3  Decreasing a key and deleting a node
In this section,  we show how to decrease the key of a node in a Fibonacci heap
inO.1/amortized  time  and  how  to delete  any  node  from  ann-node  Fibonacci
heap inO.D.n//amortized time.  In Section 19.4,  we will show that the maxi-

19.3Decreasing a key and deleting a node519
mum degreeD.n/isO.lgn/,  which will imply that  FIB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN
and FIB-HEAP-DELETErun inO.lgn/amortized time.
Decreasing a key
In the following  pseudocode  for  the operation  F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY,we
assume as before that removing a node from a linked list does not change any of
the structural attributes in the removed node.
F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY.H;x;k/
1ifk>x:key
2error“new key is greater than current key”
3x:keyDk
4yDx:p
5ify¤
NILandx:key<y:key
6C
UT.H;x;y/
7C
ASCADING-CUT.H; y/
8ifx:key<H:min:key
9H:minDx
C
UT.H;x;y/
1removexfrom the child list ofy, decrementingy:degree
2addxto the root list ofH
3x:pD
NIL
4x:markDFALSE
CASCADING-CUT.H; y/
1 ́Dy:p
2if ́¤
NIL
3ify:mark
==FALSE
4y:markDTRUE
5elseCUT.H;y; ́/
6C
ASCADING-CUT.H;  ́/
The F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYprocedure works as follows.  Lines 1–3 ensure
that the new key is no greater than the current key ofxand then assign the new key
tox.Ifxis a root or ifx:keyy:key,whereyisx’s parent, then no structural
changes need occur, since min-heap order has not been violated. Lines 4–5 test for
this condition.
If  min-heap  order  has  been  violated,  many  changes  may  occur.   We  start  by
cuttingxin line 6. The C
UTprocedure “cuts” the link betweenxand its parenty,
makingxa root.

520Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
We use themarkattributes to obtain the desired time bounds. They record a little
piece of the history of each node. Suppose that the following events have happened
to nodex:
1.   at some time,xwasaroot,
2.   thenxwas linked to (made the child of) another node,
3.   then two children ofxwere removed by cuts.
As soon as the second child has been lost, we cutxfrom its parent, making it a new
root.  The attributex:markis
TRUEif steps 1 and 2 have occurred and one child
ofxhas been cut.  The C
UTprocedure, therefore, clearsx:markin line 4, since it
performs step 1.  (We can now see why line 3 of F
IB-HEAP-LINKclearsy:mark:
nodeyis being linked to another node, and so step 2 is being performed. The next
time a child ofyis cut,y:markwill be set to
TRUE.)
We are not yet done, becausexmight be the second child cut from its parenty
since the time thatywas linked to another node.  Therefore, line 7 of F
IB-HEAP-
D
ECREASE-KEYattempts to perform acascading-cutoperation ony.Ifyis a
root, then the test in line 2 of C
ASCADING-CUTcauses the procedure to just return.
Ifyis unmarked, the procedure marks it in line 4, since its first child has just been
cut, and returns.  Ifyis marked, however, it has just lost its second child;yis cut
in line 5, and C
ASCADING-CUTcalls itself recursively in line 6 ony’s parent ́.
The C
ASCADING-CUTprocedure recurses its way up the tree until it finds either a
root or an unmarked node.
Once all the cascading cuts have occurred, lines 8–9 of F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-
K
EYfinish up by updatingH:minif necessary. The only node whose key changed
was the nodexwhose key decreased.  Thus, the new minimum node is either the
original minimum node or nodex.
Figure 19.5 shows the execution of two calls of F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY,
starting  with the Fibonacci  heap shown in Figure 19.5(a).   The first call,  shown
in  Figure  19.5(b),  involves  no  cascading  cuts.   The  second  call,  shown  in  Fig-
ures 19.5(c)–(e), invokes two cascading cuts.
We shall now show that the amortized cost of  F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYis
onlyO.1/.  We start by determining its actual cost.  The F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-
K
EYprocedure takesO.1/time, plus the time to perform the cascading cuts. Sup-
pose that a given invocation  of F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYresults inccalls of
C
ASCADING-CUT(the call made from line 7 of FIB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYfol-
lowed byc1recursive calls of C
ASCADING-CUT).  Each call of CASCADING-
C
UTtakesO.1/time exclusive of recursive calls.  Thus, the actual cost of FIB-
H
EAP-DECREASE-KEY, including all recursive calls, isO.c/.
We next compute the change in potential. LetHdenote the Fibonacci heap just
prior to the F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYoperation.  The call to CUTin line 6 of

19.3Decreasing a key and deleting a node521
17
30
2423
26
35
157
21
18
52
38
3941
(b)
17
30
2423
26
5157
21
18
52
38
3941
(c)
17
30
2423
265157
21
18
52
38
3941
(d)
17
30
24
23
265157
21
18
52
38
3941
(e)
17
30
2423
26
35
46
7
21
18
52
38
3941
(a)
H:min
H:min
H:minH:min
H:min
Figure 19.5Two calls of  FIB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY.(a)The initial Fibonacci heap.(b)The
node with key46has its key decreased to15. The node becomes a root, and its parent (with key24),
which had previously been unmarked, becomes marked.(c)–(e)The node with key35has its key
decreased  to5.   In part  (c),  the  node,  now  with key5,  becomes  a  root.   Its parent,  with key26,
is marked,  so a  cascading cut  occurs.   The node  with key26is cut from its parent  and made  an
unmarked root in (d).  Another cascading cut occurs, since the node with key24is marked as well.
This node is cut from its parent and made an unmarked root in part (e).  The cascading cuts stop
at this point, since the node with key7is a root.  (Even if this node were not a root, the cascading
cuts would stop, since it is unmarked.)  Part (e) shows the result of the F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY
operation, withH:minpointing to the new minimum node.
FIB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYcreates  a new tree rooted  at nodexand clearsx’s
mark bit (which may have already been
FALSE).  Each call of CASCADING-CUT,
except for the last one, cuts a marked node and clears the mark bit. Afterward, the
Fibonacci heap containst.H/Cctrees (the originalt.H/trees,c1trees produced
by cascading cuts, and the tree rooted atx) and at mostm.H /cC2marked nodes
(c1were unmarked by cascading cuts and the last call of C
ASCADING-CUTmay
have marked a node). The change in potential is therefore at most
..t .H /Cc/C2.m.H /cC2//.t .H /C2 m.H //D4c:

522Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
Thus, the amortized cost of FIB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYis at most
O.c/C4cDO.1/ ;
since we can scale up the units of potential to dominate the constant hidden inO.c/.
You can now see why we defined the potential function to include a term that is
twice the number of marked nodes.  When a marked nodeyis cut by a cascading
cut, its mark bit is cleared, which reduces the potential by2. One unit of potential
pays for the cut and the clearing of the mark bit, and the other unit compensates
for the unit increase in potential due to nodeybecoming a root.
Deleting a node
The  following  pseudocode  deletes  a  node  from  ann-node  Fibonacci  heap  in
O.D.n//amortized time.  We assume that there is no key value of1currently
in the Fibonacci heap.
F
IB-HEAP-DELETE.H; x/
1F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY.H; x;1/
2F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN.H /
F
IB-HEAP-DELETEmakesxbecome the minimum node in the Fibonacci heap by
giving it a uniquely small key of1.TheF
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINprocedure
then removes nodexfrom the Fibonacci heap. The amortized time of F
IB-HEAP-
D
ELETEis the sum of theO.1/amortized time of FIB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY
and theO.D.n//amortized time of FIB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN. Since we shall see
in Section 19.4 thatD.n/DO.lgn/, the amortized time of F
IB-HEAP-DELETE
isO.lgn/.
Exercises
19.3-1
Suppose that a rootxin a Fibonacci heap is marked.  Explain howxcame to be
a marked root.  Argue that it doesn’t matter to the analysis thatxis marked, even
though it is not a root that was first linked to another node and then lost one child.
19.3-2
Justify theO.1/amortized time of F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEYas an average cost
per operation by using aggregate analysis.

19.4Bounding the maximum degree523
19.4  Bounding the maximum degree
To prove that the amortized time of FIB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MINand  FIB-HEAP-
D
ELETEisO.lgn/, we must show that the upper boundD.n/on the degree of
any node of ann-node Fibonacci heap isO.lgn/. In particular, we shall show that
D.n/

log

n
 ̆
,whereis the golden ratio, defined in equation (3.24) as
D.1C
p
5/=2D1:61803 : : :  :
The key to the analysis is as follows.  For each nodexwithin a Fibonacci heap,
define size.x/to be the number of nodes, includingxitself, in the subtree rooted
atx. (Note thatxneed not be in the root list—it can be any node at all.)  We shall
show that size.x/is exponential inx:degree. Bear in mind thatx:degreeis always
maintained as an accurate count of the degree ofx.
Lemma 19.1
Letxbe  any  node  in  a  Fibonacci  heap,  and  suppose  thatx:degreeDk.Let
y
1
;y
2
;:::;y
k
denote the children ofxin the order in which they were linked tox,
from the earliest to the latest.  Then,y
1
:degree0andy
i
:degreei2for
iD2;3;:::;k.
ProofObviously,y
1
:degree0.
Fori2, we note that wheny
i
was linked tox,allofy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
i1
were
children ofx, and so we must have hadx:degreei1.  Because nodey
i
is
linked tox(by C
ONSOLIDATE) only ifx:degreeDy
i
:degree,wemusthavealso
hady
i
:degreei1at  that  time.   Since  then,  nodey
i
has  lost  at  most  one
child,  since it would have been cut fromx(by C
ASCADING-CUT)  if it had lost
two children. We conclude thaty
i
:degreei2.
We finally come to the part of the analysis that explains the name “Fibonacci
heaps.” Recall from Section 3.2 that forkD0; 1; 2; : : :,thekth Fibonacci number
is defined by the recurrence
F
k
D

0ifkD0;
1ifkD1;
F
k1
CF
k2
ifk2:
The following lemma gives another way to expressF
k
.

524Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
Lemma 19.2
For all integersk0,
F
kC2
D1C
k
X
iD0
F
i
:
ProofThe proof is by induction onk.WhenkD0,
1C
0
X
iD0
F
i
D1CF
0
D1C0
DF
2
:
We now assume the inductive hypothesis  thatF
kC1
D1C
P
k1
iD0
F
i
,andwe
have
F
kC2
DF
k
CF
kC1
DF
k
C
 
1C
k1
X
iD0
F
i
!
D1C
k
X
iD0
F
i
:
Lemma 19.3
For all integersk0,the.kC2/nd Fibonacci number satisfiesF
kC2

k
.
ProofThe proof is by induction onk.  The base cases are forkD0andkD1.
WhenkD0we haveF
2
D1D
0
,andwhenkD1we haveF
3
D2>
1:619 > 
1
.  The inductive step is fork2, and we assume thatF
iC2
>
i
for
iD0; 1; : : : ; k1. Recall thatis the positive root of equation (3.23),x
2
DxC1.
Thus, we have
F
kC2
DF
kC1
CF
k

k1
C
k2
(by the inductive hypothesis)
D
k2
.C1/
D
k2

2
(by equation (3.23))
D
k
:
The following lemma and its corollary complete the analysis.

19.4Bounding the maximum degree525
Lemma 19.4
Letxbe any node in a Fibonacci heap, and letkDx:degree.Thensize.x/
F
kC2

k
,whereD.1C
p
5/=2.
ProofLets
k
denote the minimum possible size of any node of degreekin any
Fibonacci heap.  Trivially,s
0
D1ands
1
D2.  The numbers
k
is at most size.x/
and, because adding children to a node cannot decrease the node’s size, the value
ofs
k
increases  monotonically  withk.  Consider  some node ́,  in any Fibonacci
heap,  such  that ́:degreeDkand  size. ́/Ds
k
.   Becauses
k
size.x/,we
compute  a  lower  bound  on  size.x/by  computing  a  lower  bound  ons
k
.Asin
Lemma 19.1, lety
1
;y
2
;:::;y
k
denote the children of ́in the order in which they
were linked to ́. To bounds
k
, we count one for ́itself and one for the first childy
1
(for which size.y
1
/1), giving
size.x/s
k
2C
k
X
iD2
s
y
i
:degree
2C
k
X
iD2
s
i2
;
where the last line follows from Lemma 19.1 (so thaty
i
:degreei2)andthe
monotonicity ofs
k
(so thats
y
i
:degree
s
i2
).
We now show by induction onkthats
k
F
kC2
for all nonnegative integersk.
The bases, forkD0andkD1, are trivial. For the inductive step, we assume that
k2and thats
i
F
iC2
foriD0; 1; : : : ; k1.Wehave
s
k
2C
k
X
iD2
s
i2
2C
k
X
iD2
F
i
D1C
k
X
iD0
F
i
DF
kC2
(by Lemma 19.2)

k
(by Lemma 19.3)  .
Thus, we have shown that size.x/s
k
F
kC2

k
.

526Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
Corollary 19.5
The maximum degreeD.n/of any node in ann-node Fibonacci heap isO.lgn/.
ProofLetxbe any node in ann-node Fibonacci heap,  and letkDx:degree.
By Lemma 19.4,  we havensize.x/
k
.   Taking base-logarithms  gives
usklog

n.  (In fact, becausekis an integer,k

log

n
 ̆
.)  The maximum
degreeD.n/of any node is thusO.lgn/.
Exercises
19.4-1
Professor Pinocchio claims that the height of ann-node Fibonacci heap isO.lgn/.
Show  that  the  professor  is mistaken  by  exhibiting,  for  any  positive  integern,a
sequence of Fibonacci-heap operations that creates a Fibonacci heap consisting of
just one tree that is a linear chain ofnnodes.
19.4-2
Suppose we generalize the cascading-cut  rule to cut a nodexfrom its parent as
soon as it loses itskth child, for some integer constantk. (The rule in Section 19.3
useskD2.) For what values ofkisD.n/DO.lgn/?
Problems
19-1  Alternative implementation of deletion
Professor  Pisano  has  proposed  the  following  variant  of  the  F
IB-HEAP-DELETE
procedure, claiming that it runs faster when the node being deleted is not the node
pointed to byH:min.
P
ISANO-DELETE.H; x/
1ifx
==H:min
2F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN.H /
3elseyDx:p
4ify¤
NIL
5CUT.H;x;y/
6C
ASCADING-CUT.H; y/
7addx’s child list to the root list ofH
8removexfrom the root list ofH

Problems for Chapter 19527
a.The professor’s claim that this procedure runs faster is based partly on the as-
sumption that line 7 can be performed inO.1/actual time. What is wrong with
this assumption?
b.Give a good upper  bound on the actual  time of  P
ISANO-DELETEwhenxis
notH:min.  Your bound should be in terms ofx:degreeand the numbercof
calls to the C
ASCADING-CUTprocedure.
c.Suppose that we call P
ISANO-DELETE.H; x/,andletH
0
be the Fibonacci heap
that results.  Assuming that nodexis not a root, bound the potential ofH
0
in
terms ofx:degree,c,t.H/,andm.H /.
d.Conclude  that  the amortized  time  for  P
ISANO-DELETEis asymptotically  no
better than for F
IB-HEAP-DELETE,evenwhenx¤H:min.
19-2  Binomial trees and binomial heaps
Thebinomial treeB
k
is an ordered tree (see Section B.5.2) defined recursively.
As shown in Figure 19.6(a), the binomial treeB
0
consists of a single node.  The
binomial treeB
k
consists of two binomial treesB
k1
that are linked together so
that the root of one is the leftmost child of the root of the other.  Figure 19.6(b)
shows the binomial treesB
0
throughB
4
.
a.Show that for the binomial treeB
k
,
1. there are2
k
nodes,
2. the height of the tree isk,
3. there are exactly

k
i

nodes at depthiforiD0; 1; : : : ; k,and
4. the root has degreek, which is greater than that of any other node; moreover,
as Figure 19.6(c) shows, if we number the children of the root from left to
right byk1; k2;:::;0, then childiis the root of a subtreeB
i
.
Abinomial heapHis a set of binomial trees that satisfies the following proper-
ties:
1.  Each node has akey(like a Fibonacci heap).
2.  Each binomial tree inHobeys the min-heap property.
3.  For any nonnegative integerk, there is at most one binomial tree inHwhose
root has degreek.
b.Suppose that a binomial heapHhas a total ofnnodes. Discuss the relationship
between the binomial trees thatHcontains and the binary representation ofn.
Conclude thatHconsists of at most
b
lgn
c
C1binomial trees.

528Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
B
4
B
k–1
B
k–2
B
k
B
2
B
1
B
0
B
3
B
2
B
1
B
0
B
k
B
k–1
B
k–1
B
0
(a)
depth
0
1
2
3
4
(b)
(c)
Figure 19.6  (a)The recursive definition of the binomial treeB
k
.  Triangles represent rooted sub-
trees.(b)The binomial treesB
0
throughB
4
.  Node depths inB
4
are shown.(c)Another way of
looking at the binomial treeB
k
.
Suppose  that  we represent  a binomial  heap  as  follows.   The  left-child,  right-
sibling  scheme  of  Section  10.4 represents  each  binomial  tree  within  a binomial
heap.  Each node contains its key; pointers to its parent, to its leftmost child, and
to the sibling immediately to its right (these pointers are
NILwhen appropriate);
and its degree (as in Fibonacci heaps, how many children it has). The roots form a
singly linked root list, ordered by the degrees of the roots (from low to high), and
we access the binomial heap by a pointer to the first node on the root list.
c.Complete the description of how to represent a binomial heap (i.e., name the
attributes, describe when attributes have the value
NIL, and define how the root
list is organized),  and show how to implement the same seven operations  on
binomial heaps as this chapter implemented on Fibonacci heaps.  Each opera-
tion should run inO.lgn/worst-case time, wherenis the number of nodes in

Problems for Chapter 19529
the binomial heap (or in the case of the UNIONoperation, in the two binomial
heaps that are being united). The M
AKE-HEAPoperation should take constant
time.
d.Suppose that we were to implement only the mergeable-heap operations on a
Fibonacci heap (i.e., we do not implement the D
ECREASE-KEYor DELETEop-
erations). How would the trees in a Fibonacci heap resemble those in a binomial
heap?  How would they differ?  Show that the maximum degree in ann-node
Fibonacci heap would be at most
b
lgn
c
.
e.Professor McGee has devised a new data structure based on Fibonacci heaps.
A McGee heap has the same structure as a Fibonacci  heap and supports just
the mergeable-heap operations.  The implementations of the operations are the
same as for Fibonacci  heaps,  except  that insertion  and union consolidate  the
root list as their last step.  What are the worst-case running times of operations
on McGee heaps?
19-3  More Fibonacci-heap operations
We wish to augment a Fibonacci heapHto support two new operations without
changing the amortized running time of any other Fibonacci-heap operations.
a.The operation F
IB-HEAP-CHANGE-KEY.H;x;k/changes the key of nodex
to the valuek. Give an efficient implementation of F
IB-HEAP-CHANGE-KEY,
and analyze the amortized running time of your implementation for the cases
in whichkis greater than, less than, or equal tox:key.
b.Give an efficient  implementation  of  F
IB-HEAP-PRUNE.H; r /,  which  deletes
qDmin.r; H:n/nodes fromH. You may choose anyqnodes to delete. Ana-
lyze the amortized running time of your implementation. (Hint:You may need
to modify the data structure and potential function.)
19-4  2-3-4 heaps
Chapter 18 introduced the 2-3-4 tree, in which every internal node (other than pos-
sibly the root) has two, three, or four children and all leaves have the same depth. In
this problem, we shall implement2-3-4 heaps, which support the mergeable-heap
operations.
The 2-3-4 heaps differ from 2-3-4 trees in the following ways.  In 2-3-4 heaps,
only leaves store keys, and each leafxstores exactly one key in the attributex:key.
The keys in the leaves may appear  in any order.   Each internal  nodexcontains
avaluex:smallthat is equal to the smallest key stored in any leaf in the subtree
rooted atx.  The rootrcontains an attributer:heightthat gives the height of the

530Chapter 19Fibonacci Heaps
tree.  Finally,  2-3-4 heaps are designed  to be kept in main memory,  so that disk
reads and writes are not needed.
Implement the following 2-3-4 heap operations.  In parts (a)–(e), each operation
should run inO.lgn/time on a 2-3-4 heap withnelements. The U
NIONoperation
in part (f) should run inO.lgn/time, wherenis the number of elements in the two
input heaps.
a.M
INIMUM, which returns a pointer to the leaf with the smallest key.
b.D
ECREASE-KEY,  which decreases the key of a given leafxto a given value
kx:key.
c.I
NSERT, which inserts leafxwith keyk.
d.D
ELETE, which deletes a given leafx.
e.E
XTRACT-MIN, which extracts the leaf with the smallest key.
f.U
NION, which unites two 2-3-4 heaps, returning a single 2-3-4 heap and de-
stroying the input heaps.
Chapter notes
Fredman and Tarjan [114] introduced Fibonacci heaps.  Their paper also describes
the application of Fibonacci heaps to the problems of single-source shortest paths,
all-pairs shortest paths, weighted bipartite matching, and the minimum-spanning-
tree problem.
Subsequently, Driscoll, Gabow, Shrairman, and Tarjan [96] developed “relaxed
heaps”  as  an  alternative  to  Fibonacci  heaps.   They  devised  two  varieties  of  re-
laxed heaps.  One gives the same amortized time bounds as Fibonacci heaps.  The
other allows D
ECREASE-KEYto run inO.1/worst-case (not amortized) time and
E
XTRACT-MINand  DELETEto run inO.lgn/worst-case  time.   Relaxed heaps
also have some advantages over Fibonacci heaps in parallel algorithms.
See also the chapter notes for Chapter 6 for other data structures that support fast
D
ECREASE-KEYoperations when the sequence of values returned by EXTRACT-
M
INcalls are monotonically  increasing  over time and the data are integers  in a
specific range.

20van Emde Boas Trees
In previous chapters, we saw data structures that support the operations of a priority
queue—binary heaps in Chapter 6, red-black trees in Chapter 13,
1
and Fibonacci
heaps in Chapter 19.  In each of these data structures,  at least one important op-
eration tookO.lgn/time, either worst case or amortized.  In fact, because each
of these data structures bases its decisions on comparing keys, the.nlgn/lower
bound  for sorting  in Section 8.1 tells  us that  at least  one operation  will have to
take.lgn/time. Why? If we could perform both the I
NSERTand EXTRACT-MIN
operations ino.lgn/time, then we could sortnkeys ino.nlgn/time by first per-
formingnI
NSERToperations, followed bynEXTRACT-MINoperations.
We saw in Chapter 8, however, that sometimes we can exploit additional infor-
mation about the keys to sort ino.nlgn/time.  In particular,  with counting sort
we can sortnkeys, each an integer in the range0tok, in time‚.nCk/,which
is‚.n/whenkDO.n/.
Since we can circumvent the.nlgn/lower bound for sorting when the keys are
integers in a bounded range, you might wonder whether we can perform each of the
priority-queue operations ino.lgn/time in a similar scenario.  In this chapter, we
shall see that we can:  van Emde Boas trees support the priority-queue operations,
and a few others,  each inO.lg lgn/worst-case  time.  The hitch is that the keys
must be integers in the range0ton1, with no duplicates allowed.
Specifically,  van Emde Boas trees support each of the dynamic set operations
listed on page 230—S
EARCH,INSERT,DELETE,MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,SUC-
CESSOR,andPREDECESSOR—inO.lg lgn/time.  In this chapter,  we will omit
discussion of satellite data and focus only on storing keys. Because we concentrate
on keys and disallow duplicate keys to be stored, instead of describing the S
EARCH
1
Chapter 13 does not explicitly discuss how to implement EXTRACT-MINand DECREASE-KEY,but
we can easily build these operations for any data structure that supports M
INIMUM,DELETE,and
I
NSERT.

532Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
operation, we will implement the simpler operation MEMBER.S; x/, which returns
a boolean indicating whether the valuexis currently in dynamic setS.
So far, we have used the parameternfor two distinct purposes:  the number of
elements in the dynamic set, and the range of the possible values.  To avoid any
further confusion,  from here on we will usento denote the number of elements
currently in the set anduas the range of possible values, so that each van Emde
Boas tree operation  runs inO.lg lgu/time.   We call the set
f
0; 1; 2; : : : ; u1
g
theuniverseof  values  that  can  be  stored  andutheuniverse size.   We  assume
throughout this chapter thatuis an exact power of2, i.e.,uD2
k
for some integer
k1.
Section 20.1 starts us out by examining some simple approaches  that will get
us  going  in  the  right  direction.   We  enhance  these  approaches  in  Section  20.2,
introducing proto van Emde Boas structures, which are recursive but do not achieve
our goal ofO.lg lgu/-time operations. Section 20.3 modifies proto van Emde Boas
structures to develop van Emde Boas trees, and it shows how to implement each
operation inO.lg lgu/time.
20.1  Preliminary approaches
In  this  section,  we shall  examine  various  approaches  for  storing  a dynamic  set.
Although none will achieve theO.lg lgu/time bounds that we desire, we will gain
insights that will help us understand van Emde Boas trees when we see them later
in this chapter.
Direct addressing
Direct addressing,  as we saw in Section 11.1, provides the simplest approach to
storing a dynamic set.  Since in this chapter we are concerned only with storing
keys, we can simplify the direct-addressing approach to store the dynamic set as a
bit vector, as discussed in Exercise 11.1-2.  To store a dynamic set of values from
the universe
f
0; 1; 2; : : : ; u1
g
, we maintain an arrayAŒ0 : : u1ofubits. The
entryAŒxholds a1if the valuexis in the dynamic set, and it holds a0otherwise.
Although we can perform each of the I
NSERT,DELETE,andMEMBERoperations
inO.1/time with a bit vector, the remaining operations—M
INIMUM,MAXIMUM,
S
UCCESSOR,andPREDECESSOR—each take‚.u/time in the worst case because

20.1Preliminary approaches533
0
0
0
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
0
6
1
7
0
8
0
9
0
10
0
11
0
12
0
13
1
14
1
15
01110001
1101
11
1
A
Figure 20.1A  binary  tree  of  bits  superimposed  on  top  of  a  bit  vector  representing  the  set
f
2; 3; 4; 5; 7; 14; 15
g
whenuD16.   Each  internal  node  contains  a1if and  only  if some  leaf  in
its subtree contains a1. The arrows show the path followed to determine the predecessor of14in the
set.
we might have to scan through‚.u/elements.
2
For example, if a set contains only
the values0andu1,  then to find the successor  of0,  we would have to scan
entries1throughu2before finding a1inAŒu1.
Superimposing a binary tree structure
We can short-cut long scans in the bit vector by superimposing a binary tree of bits
on top of it.  Figure 20.1 shows an example.  The entries of the bit vector form the
leaves of the binary tree, and each internal node contains a1if and only if any leaf
in its subtree contains a1.  In other words, the bit stored in an internal node is the
logical-or of its two children.
The operations that took‚.u/worst-case time with an unadorned bit vector now
use the tree structure:

To find the minimum value in the set, start at the root and head down toward
the leaves, always taking the leftmost node containing a1.

To find the maximum value in the set, start at the root and head down toward
the leaves, always taking the rightmost node containing a1.
2
We assume throughout this chapter that MINIMUMand MAXIMUMreturnNILif the dynamic set
is empty and that S
UCCESSORand PREDECESSORreturnNILif the element they are given has no
successor or predecessor, respectively.

534Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees

To find the successor ofx, start at the leaf indexed byx, and head up toward the
root until we enter a node from the left and this node has a1in its right child ́.
Then head down through node ́, always taking the leftmost node containing
a1(i.e., find the minimum value in the subtree rooted at the right child ́).

To find the predecessor ofx, start at the leaf indexed byx, and head up toward
the root until we enter a node from the right and this node has a1in its left
child ́.  Then head down through node ́,  always taking the rightmost  node
containing  a1(i.e.,  find the maximum value in the subtree rooted at the left
child ́).
Figure 20.1 shows the path taken to find the predecessor,7,ofthevalue14.
We also augment the I
NSERTand DELETEoperations appropriately.  When in-
serting a value, we store a1in each node on the simple path from the appropriate
leaf up to the root.  When deleting a value, we go from the appropriate leaf up to
the root, recomputing the bit in each internal node on the path as the logical-or of
its two children.
Since the height of the tree is lguand each of the above operations makes at
most one pass up the tree and at most one pass down, each operation takesO.lgu/
time in the worst case.
This approach is only marginally better than just using a red-black tree. We can
still perform the M
EMBERoperation inO.1/time, whereas searching a red-black
tree takesO.lgn/time.  Then again, if the numbernof elements stored is much
smaller than the sizeuof the universe, a red-black tree would be faster for all the
other operations.
Superimposing a tree of constant height
What happens if we superimpose a tree with greater degree?  Let us assume that
the size of the universe isuD2
2k
for some integerk,sothat
p
uis an integer.
Instead of superimposing a binary tree on top of the bit vector, we superimpose a
tree of degree
p
u.  Figure 20.2(a) shows such a tree for the same bit vector as in
Figure 20.1. The height of the resulting tree is always2.
As  before,  each  internal  node  stores  the  logical-or  of  the  bits  within  its  sub-
tree, so that the
p
uinternal nodes at depth1summarize each group of
p
uval-
ues.   As  Figure  20.2(b)  demonstrates,  we  can  think  of  these  nodes  as  an  array
summaryŒ0 : :
p
u1,wheresummaryŒi contains  a1if  and only  if  the subar-
rayAŒi
p
u::.iC1/
p
u1contains  a1.   We call this
p
u-bit  subarray  ofA
theithcluster.Foragivenvalueofx,  the  bitAŒxappears  in  cluster  num-
ber
b
x=
p
u
c
.NowINSERTbecomes  anO.1/-time  operation:   to  insertx,  set
bothAŒxandsummaryŒ
b
x=
p
u
c
to1. We can use thesummaryarray to perform

20.1Preliminary approaches535
0
0
0
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
0
6
1
7
0
8
0
9
0
10
0
11
0
12
0
13
1
14
1
15
1
1
101
(a)
0
0
0
1
1
2
1
3
1
4
1
5
0
6
1
7
0
8
0
9
0
10
0
11
0
12
0
13
1
14
1
15
(b)
1
0
1
1
0
2
1
3
AA
summary
p
ubits
p
ubits
Figure 20.2  (a)A tree of degree
p
usuperimposed on top of the same bit vector as in Figure 20.1.
Each internal node stores the logical-or of the bits in its subtree.(b)A view of the same structure,
but with the internal nodes at depth1treated as an arraysummaryŒ0 : :
p
u1,wheresummaryŒi is
the logical-or of the subarrayAŒi
p
u::.iC1/
p
u1.
each of the operations MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,SUCCESSOR,PREDECESSOR,and
D
ELETEinO.
p
u/time:

To find the minimum (maximum) value, find the leftmost (rightmost) entry in
summarythat contains a1, saysummaryŒi , and then do a linear search within
theith cluster for the leftmost (rightmost)1.

To find the successor (predecessor) ofx, first search to the right (left) within its
cluster. If we find a1, that position gives the result. Otherwise, letiD
b
x=
p
u
c
and search to the right (left) within thesummaryarray from indexi.Thefirst
position that holds a1gives the index of a cluster.  Search within that cluster
for the leftmost (rightmost)1. That position holds the successor (predecessor).

To delete the valuex,letiD
b
x=
p
u
c
.SetAŒxto0and then setsummaryŒi 
to the logical-or of the bits in theith cluster.
In each of the above operations, we search through at most two clusters of
p
ubits
plus thesummaryarray, and so each operation takesO.
p
u/time.
At first glance, it seems as though we have made negative progress. Superimpos-
ing a binary tree gave usO.lgu/-time operations, which are asymptotically faster
thanO.
p
u/time. Using a tree of degree
p
uwill turn out to be a key idea of van
Emde Boas trees, however. We continue down this path in the next section.
Exercises
20.1-1
Modify the data structures in this section to support duplicate keys.

536Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
20.1-2
Modify the data structures in this section to support keys that have associated satel-
lite data.
20.1-3
Observe that, using the structures in this section, the way we find the successor and
predecessor  of a valuexdoes not depend on whetherxis in the set at the time.
Show how to find the successor ofxin a binary search tree whenxis not stored in
the tree.
20.1-4
Suppose that instead of superimposing a tree of degree
p
u,weweretosuperim-
pose a tree of degreeu
1= k
,wherek>1is a constant. What would be the height of
such a tree, and how long would each of the operations take?
20.2  A recursive structure
In this section, we modify the idea of superimposing a tree of degree
p
uon top of
a bit vector. In the previous section, we used a summary structure of size
p
u, with
each entry pointing to another stucture of size
p
u.  Now, we make the structure
recursive, shrinking the universe size by the square root at each level of recursion.
Starting with a universe of sizeu, we make structures holding
p
uDu
1=2
items,
which themselves hold structures ofu
1=4
items, which hold structures ofu
1=8
items,
and so on, down to a base size of2.
For simplicity, in this section, we assume thatuD2
2
k
for some integerk,so
thatu; u
1=2
;u
1=4
;:::are integers. This restriction would be quite severe in practice,
allowing only values ofuin the sequence2; 4; 16; 256; 65536; : : :. We shall see in
the next section how to relax this assumption  and assume only thatuD2
k
for
some integerk.  Since the structure we examine in this section is only a precursor
to the true van Emde Boas tree structure,  we tolerate  this restriction  in favor of
aiding our understanding.
Recalling that our goal is to achieve running times ofO.lg lgu/for the oper-
ations, let’s think about how we might obtain such running times.  At the end of
Section 4.3, we saw that by changing variables, we could show that the recurrence
T .n/D2T

p
n
 ̆
Clgn(20.1)
has  the  solutionT .n/DO.lgnlg lgn/.   Let’s  consider  a  similar,  but  simpler,
recurrence:
T.u/DT.
p
u/CO.1/ :(20.2)

20.2A recursive structure537
If  we  use  the  same  technique,  changing  variables,  we  can  show  that  recur-
rence (20.2) has the solutionT.u/DO.lg lgu/.LetmDlgu,sothatuD2
m
and we have
T.2
m
/DT.2
m=2
/CO.1/ :
Now we renameS.m/DT.2
m
/, giving the new recurrence
S.m/DS.m=2/CO.1/ :
By case 2 of the master method, this recurrence has the solutionS.m/DO.lgm/.
We change back fromS.m/toT.u/,givingT.u/DT.2
m
/DS.m/DO.lgm/D
O.lg lgu/.
Recurrence (20.2) will guide our search for a data structure.  We will design a
recursive data structure that shrinks by a factor of
p
uin each level of its recursion.
When an operation traverses this data structure, it will spend a constant amount of
time at each level before recursing to the level below.  Recurrence (20.2) will then
characterize the running time of the operation.
Here is another way to think of how the term lg lguends up in the solution to
recurrence (20.2). As we look at the universe size in each level of the recursive data
structure, we see the sequenceu; u
1=2
;u
1=4
;u
1=8
;:::. If we consider how many bits
we need to store the universe size at each level, we need lguat the top level, and
each level needs half the bits of the previous level.  In general, if we start withb
bits and halve the number of bits at each level, then after lgblevels, we get down
to just one bit.  SincebDlgu, we see that after lg lgulevels, we have a universe
size of2.
Looking  back  at  the  data  structure  in  Figure 20.2,  a given  valuexresides  in
cluster  number
b
x=
p
u
c
.Ifweviewxas  a lgu-bit  binary  integer,  that  cluster
number,
b
x=
p
u
c
, is given by the most significant.lgu/=2bits ofx.  Within its
cluster,xappears in positionxmod
p
u, which is given by the least significant
.lgu/=2bits ofx.  We will need to index in this way, and so let us define some
functions that will help us do so:
high.x/D

x=
p
u
 ̆
;
low.x/Dxmod
p
u;
index.x; y/Dx
p
uCy:
The function high.x/gives the most significant.lgu/=2bits ofx, producing the
number ofx’s cluster. The function low.x/gives the least significant.lgu/=2bits
ofxand providesx’s position within its cluster. The function index.x; y/builds an
element number fromxandy, treatingxas the most significant.lgu/=2bits of the
element number andyas the least significant.lgu/=2bits.  We have the identity
xDindex.high.x/;low.x//.Thevalueofuused by each of these functions will

538Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
...
0123
p
u1
proto-EB.u/
usummarycluster
proto-EB.
p
u/structure
p
uproto-EB.
p
u/structures
Figure 20.3The information in aproto-EB.u/structure whenu4.  The structure contains the
universe sizeu, a pointersummaryto aproto-EB.
p
u/structure, and an arrayclusterŒ0 : :
p
u1
of
p
upointers toproto-EB.
p
u/structures.
always  be the  universe  size  of  the data  structure  in  which  we call  the function,
which changes as we descend into the recursive structure.
20.2.1  Proto van Emde Boas structures
Taking our cue from recurrence (20.2), let us design a recursive data structure to
support the operations. Although this data structure will fail to achieve our goal of
O.lg lgu/time for some operations, it serves as a basis for the van Emde Boas tree
structure that we will see in Section 20.3.
For the universe
f
0; 1; 2; : : : ; u1
g
,wedefineaproto van Emde Boas struc-
ture,orproto-vEB structure,  which we denote  asproto-EB.u/,  recursively  as
follows.  Eachproto-EB.u/structure contains an attributeugiving its universe
size. In addition, it contains the following:

IfuD2, then it is the base size, and it contains an arrayAŒ0 : : 1of two bits.

Otherwise,uD2
2
k
for  some  integerk1,sothatu4.   In  addition
to the universe sizeu, the data structureproto-EB.u/contains the following
attributes, illustrated in Figure 20.3:

a pointer namedsummaryto aproto-EB.
p
u/structure and

an arrayclusterŒ0 : :
p
u1of
p
upointers, each to aproto-EB.
p
u/struc-
ture.
The elementx,where0x<u, is recursively stored in the cluster numbered
high.x/as element low.x/within that cluster.
In the two-level structure of the previous section, each node stores a summary
array  of  size
p
u,  in  which  each  entry  contains  a  bit.   From  the  index  of  each
entry,  we can compute the starting index of the subarray of size
p
uthat the bit
summarizes. In the proto-vEB structure, we use explicit pointers rather than index

20.2A recursive structure539
0123
clusteru16summary
proto-vEB(16)
01
cluster
u
4
summary
proto-vEB(4)
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
1
1
01
cluster
u
4
summary
proto-vEB(4)
01
cluster
u
4
summary
proto-vEB(4)
01
cluster
u
4
summary
proto-vEB(4)
01
cluster
u
4
summary
proto-vEB(4)
elements 0,1elements 2,3clusters 0,1clusters 2,3elements 4,5elements 6,7
elements 8,9   elements 10,11elements 12,13 elements 14,15
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
1
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
0
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
0
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
0
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
0
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
1
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
1
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
1
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
0
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
0
1
u
2
0
1
A
proto-vEB
(2)
1
1
u
2
Figure 20.4Aproto-EB.16/structure representing the set
f
2; 3; 4; 5; 7; 14; 15
g
.  It points to four
proto-EB.4/structures inclusterŒ0 : : 3, and to a summary structure, which is also aproto-EB.4/.
Eachproto-EB.4/structure  points  to  twoproto-EB.2/structures  inclusterŒ0 : : 1,andtoa
proto-EB.2/summary.   Eachproto-EB.2/structure contains just an arrayAŒ0 : : 1of two bits.
Theproto-EB.2/structures above “elementsi,j” store bitsiandjof the actual dynamic set, and
theproto-EB.2/structures above “clustersi,j” store the summary bits for clustersiandjin the
top-levelproto-EB.16/structure.  For clarity, heavy shading indicates the top level of a proto-vEB
structure  that  stores  summary  information  for  its parent  structure;  such  a  proto-vEB  structure  is
otherwise identical to any other proto-vEB structure with the same universe size.

540Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
calculations. The arraysummarycontains the summary bits stored recursively in a
proto-vEB structure, and the arrayclustercontains
p
upointers.
Figure 20.4 shows a fully expandedproto-EB.16/structure  representing  the
set
f
2; 3; 4; 5; 7; 14; 15
g
.Ifthevalueiis in the proto-vEB structure pointed to by
summary,  then theith cluster  contains  some value in the set  being  represented.
As  in  the  tree  of  constant  height,clusterŒi represents  the  valuesi
p
uthrough
.iC1/
p
u1, which form theith cluster.
At the base level,  the elements of the actual dynamic  sets are stored in some
of theproto-EB.2/structures,  and the remainingproto-EB.2/structures  store
summary bits.   Beneath each of the non-summary  base structures,  the figure in-
dicates  which  bits  it  stores.    For  example,  theproto-EB.2/structure  labeled
“elements 6,7” stores  bit6(0,  since  element6is not in  the set)  in itsAŒ0and
bit7(1, since element7is in the set) in itsAŒ1.
Like the clusters, each summary is just a dynamic set with universe size
p
u,
and so we represent each summary as aproto-EB.
p
u/structure.  The four sum-
mary bits for the mainproto-EB.16/structure are in the leftmostproto-EB.4/
structure,  and they ultimately appear in twoproto-EB.2/structures.  For exam-
ple, theproto-EB.2/structure labeled “clusters 2,3” hasAŒ0D0, indicating that
cluster2of theproto-EB.16/structure (containing elements8; 9; 10; 11)isall0,
andAŒ1D1, telling us that cluster3(containing elements12; 13; 14; 15) has at
least one1. Eachproto-EB.4/structure points to its own summary, which is itself
stored as aproto-EB.2/structure.  For example, look at theproto-EB.2/struc-
ture just to the left of the one labeled “elements 0,1.” Because itsAŒ0is0, it tells
us that the “elements 0,1” structure is all0, and because itsAŒ1is1, we know that
the “elements 2,3” structure contains at least one1.
20.2.2  Operations on a proto van Emde Boas structure
We  shall  now  describe  how  to  perform  operations  on  a  proto-vEB  structure.
We first examine the query operations—M
EMBER,MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,and
S
UCCESSOR—which  do  not  change  the  proto-vEB  structure.   We  then  discuss
I
NSERTand DELETE.WeleaveMAXIMUMand PREDECESSOR, which are sym-
metric to M
INIMUMand SUCCESSOR, respectively, as Exercise 20.2-1.
Each of the M
EMBER,SUCCESSOR,PREDECESSOR,INSERT,andDELETEop-
erations takes a parameterx, along with a proto-vEB structureV.  Each of these
operations assumes that0x<V:u.
Determining whether a value is in the set
To perform  M
EMBER.x/, we need to find the bit corresponding  toxwithin the
appropriateproto-EB.2/structure.  We can do so inO.lg lgu/time, bypassing

20.2A recursive structure541
thesummarystructures  altogether.   The  following  procedure  takes  aproto-EB
structureVand a valuex, and it returns a bit indicating whetherxis in the dynamic
set held byV.
P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER.V; x/
1ifV:u
==2
2returnV:AŒx
3else returnP
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
The P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBERprocedure works as follows.  Line 1 tests whether
we are in a base case,  whereVis aproto-EB.2/structure.  Line 2 handles the
base case, simply returning the appropriate bit of arrayA.  Line 3 deals with the
recursive case,  “drilling down” into the appropriate smaller proto-vEB structure.
The value high.x/says whichproto-EB.
p
u/structure we visit, and low.x/de-
termines which element within thatproto-EB.
p
u/structure we are querying.
Let’s  see  what  happens  when  we  call  P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER.V; 6/on  the
proto-EB.16/structure  in Figure 20.4.   Since high.6/D1whenuD16,we
recurse into theproto-EB.4/structure in the upper right, and we ask about ele-
ment low.6/D2of that structure. In this recursive call,uD4, and so we recurse
again.  WithuD4,wehavehigh.2/D1and low.2/D0, and so we ask about
element0of theproto-EB.2/structure in the upper right. This recursive call turns
out to be a base case, and so it returnsAŒ0D0back up through the chain of re-
cursive calls.  Thus, we get the result that P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER.V; 6/returns0,
indicating that6is not in the set.
To  determine  the  running  time  of  P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER,letT.u/denote
its  running  time  on  aproto-EB.u/structure.    Each  recursive  call  takes  con-
stant  time,  not  including  the  time  taken  by  the  recursive  calls  that  it  makes.
When  P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBERmakes  a  recursive  call,   it  makes  a  call  on  a
proto-EB.
p
u/structure. Thus, we can characterize the running time by the recur-
renceT.u/DT.
p
u/CO.1/, which we have already seen as recurrence (20.2).
Its solution isT.u/DO.lg lgu/, and so we conclude that P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER
runs in timeO.lg lgu/.
Finding the minimum element
Now  we  examine  how  to  perform  the  M
INIMUMoperation.The  procedure
P
ROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.V /returns the minimum element in the proto-vEB struc-
tureV,or
NILifVrepresents an empty set.

542Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
PROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.V /
1ifV:u
==2
2ifV:AŒ0
==1
3return0
4elseifV:AŒ1
==1
5return1
6else return
NIL
7elsemin-clusterDPROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.V:summary/
8ifmin-cluster
==NIL
9returnNIL
10elseoffsetDPROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒmin-cluster/
11returnindex.min-cluster;offset/
This procedure works as follows. Line 1 tests for the base case, which lines 2–6
handle by brute force. Lines 7–11 handle the recursive case. First, line 7 finds the
number of the first cluster that contains an element of the set.  It does so by recur-
sively calling P
ROTO-VEB-MINIMUMonV:summary,whichisaproto-EB.
p
u/
structure.  Line 7 assigns this cluster number to the variablemin-cluster. If the set
is empty, then the recursive call returned
NIL, and line 9 returnsNIL.  Otherwise,
the minimum element of the set is somewhere in cluster numbermin-cluster.The
recursive call in line 10 finds the offset within the cluster of the minimum element
in this cluster.  Finally, line 11 constructs the value of the minimum element from
the cluster number and offset, and it returns this value.
Although querying the summary information allows us to quickly find the clus-
ter containing the minimum element, because this procedure makes two recursive
calls onproto-EB.
p
u/structures, it does not run inO.lg lgu/time in the worst
case.  LettingT.u/denote the worst-case time for P
ROTO-VEB-MINIMUMon a
proto-EB.u/structure, we have the recurrence
T.u/D2T .
p
u/CO.1/ :(20.3)
Again,  we use a change  of variables  to solve this recurrence,  lettingmDlgu,
which gives
T.2
m
/D2T .2
m=2
/CO.1/ :
RenamingS.m/DT.2
m
/gives
S.m/D2S.m=2/CO.1/ ;
which, by case 1 of the master method, has the solutionS.m/D‚.m/. By chang-
ing back fromS.m/toT.u/,wehavethatT.u/DT.2
m
/DS.m/D‚.m/D
‚.lgu/.   Thus,  we see that  because  of  the second  recursive  call,  P
ROTO-VEB-
M
INIMUMruns in‚.lgu/time rather than the desiredO.lg lgu/time.

20.2A recursive structure543
Finding the successor
The S
UCCESSORoperation is even worse. In the worst case, it makes two recursive
calls, along with a call to P
ROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.  The procedure PROTO-VEB-
S
UCCESSOR.V; x/returns the smallest element in the proto-vEB structureVthat
is greater thanx,or
NILif no element inVis greater thanx. It does not requirex
to be a member of the set, but it does assume that0x<V:u.
P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR.V; x/
1ifV:u
==2
2ifx
==0andV:AŒ1==1
3return1
4else return
NIL
5elseoffsetDPROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
6ifoffset¤
NIL
7returnindex.high.x/;offset/
8elsesucc-clusterDP
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR.V:summary;high.x//
9ifsucc-cluster
==NIL
10returnNIL
11elseoffsetDPROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒsucc-cluster/
12returnindex.succ-cluster;offset/
The  P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSORprocedure  works as follows.   As usual,  line 1
tests for the base case, which lines 2–4 handle by brute force: the only way thatx
can have  a successor  within  aproto-EB.2/structure  is whenxD0andAŒ1
is1.  Lines 5–12 handle the recursive case.  Line 5 searches for a successor tox
withinx’s cluster, assigning the result tooffset.  Line 6 determines whetherxhas
a successor within its cluster; if it does, then line 7 computes and returns the value
of this successor. Otherwise, we have to search in other clusters. Line 8 assigns to
succ-clusterthe number of the next nonempty cluster, using the summary informa-
tion to find it.  Line 9 tests whethersucc-clusteris
NIL, with line 10 returningNIL
if all succeeding  clusters  are empty.   Ifsucc-clusteris non-NIL,  line  11 assigns
the first element within that cluster tooffset, and line 12 computes and returns the
minimum element in that cluster.
In  the  worst  case,  P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSORcalls  itself  recursively  twice  on
proto-EB.
p
u/structures,  and it makes one call to PROTO-VEB-MINIMUMon
aproto-EB.
p
u/structure.    Thus,  the  recurrence  for  the  worst-case  running
timeT.u/of P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSORis
T.u/D2T .
p
u/C‚.lg
p
u/
D2T .
p
u/C‚.lgu/ :

544Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
We can  employ  the  same  technique  that  we used  for  recurrence  (20.1)  to show
that this recurrence has the solutionT.u/D‚.lgulg lgu/.  Thus, P
ROTO-VEB-
S
UCCESSORis asymptotically slower than PROTO-VEB-MINIMUM.
Inserting an element
To insert an element, we need to insert it into the appropriate cluster and also set
the summary bit for that cluster to1.  The procedure P
ROTO-VEB-INSERT.V; x/
inserts the valuexinto the proto-vEB structureV.
P
ROTO-VEB-INSERT.V; x/
1ifV:u
==2
2V:AŒxD1
3elseP
ROTO-VEB-INSERT.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
4P
ROTO-VEB-INSERT.V:summary;high.x//
In the base case, line 2 sets the appropriate bit in the arrayAto1. In the recursive
case, the recursive call in line 3 insertsxinto the appropriate cluster,  and line 4
sets the summary bit for that cluster to1.
Because P
ROTO-VEB-INSERTmakes two recursive calls in the worst case, re-
currence (20.3) characterizes its running time.  Hence, P
ROTO-VEB-INSERTruns
in‚.lgu/time.
Deleting an element
The D
ELETEoperation is more complicated than insertion. Whereas we can always
set a summary bit to1when inserting, we cannot always reset the same summary
bit to0when deleting.  We need to determine whether any bit in the appropriate
cluster is1.  As we have defined proto-vEB structures, we would have to examine
all
p
ubits within a cluster to determine whether any of them are1. Alternatively,
we could  add  an attributento the proto-vEB  structure,  counting  how many el-
ements  it  has.   We leave  implementation  of  P
ROTO-VEB-DELETEas Exercises
20.2-2 and 20.2-3.
Clearly, we need to modify the proto-vEB structure to get each operation down
to making at most one recursive call. We will see in the next section how to do so.
Exercises
20.2-1
Write pseudocode for the procedures P
ROTO-VEB-MAXIMUMand PROTO-VEB-
P
REDECESSOR.

20.3The van Emde Boas tree545
20.2-2
Write  pseudocode  for  P
ROTO-VEB-DELETE.   It  should  update  the  appropriate
summary bit by scanning  the related bits within the cluster.   What is the worst-
case running time of your procedure?
20.2-3
Add the attributento each proto-vEB  structure,  giving the number  of elements
currently in the set it represents, and write pseudocode for P
ROTO-VEB-DELETE
that uses the attributento decide when to reset summary bits to0.  What is the
worst-case running time of your procedure? What other procedures need to change
because of the new attribute? Do these changes affect their running times?
20.2-4
Modify the proto-vEB structure to support duplicate keys.
20.2-5
Modify the proto-vEB structure to support keys that have associated satellite data.
20.2-6
Write pseudocode for a procedure that creates aproto-EB.u/structure.
20.2-7
Argue that if line 9 of  P
ROTO-VEB-MINIMUMis executed,  then the proto-vEB
structure is empty.
20.2-8
Suppose that we designed a proto-vEB structure in which eachclusterarray had
onlyu
1=4
elements. What would the running times of each operation be?
20.3  The van Emde Boas tree
The proto-vEB structure of the previous section is close to what we need to achieve
O.lg lgu/running times. It falls short because we have to recurse too many times
in most  of  the operations.   In  this  section,  we shall  design  a data  structure  that
is similar to the proto-vEB structure but stores a little more information, thereby
removing the need for some of the recursion.
In Section 20.2, we observed that the assumption that we made about the uni-
verse size—thatuD2
2
k
for some integerk—is unduly restrictive, confining the
possible values ofuan overly sparse set.  From this point on, therefore,  we will
allow the universe sizeuto be any exact power of2,andwhen
p
uis not an inte-

546Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
...
0123
"
p
u1
EB.u/uminmax
summarycluster
EB.
"
p
u/
"
p
uEB.
#
p
u/trees
Figure 20.5The  information  in  aEB.u/tree  whenu>2.   The  structure  contains  the  uni-
verse  sizeu,elementsminandmax,  a  pointersummaryto  aEB.
"
p
u/tree,  and  an  array
clusterŒ0 : :
"
p
u1of
"
p
upointers toEB.
#
p
u/trees.
ger—that is, ifuis an odd power of2(uD2
2kC1
for some integerk0)—then
we will divide the lgubits of a number into the most significant
d
.lgu/=2
e
bits and
the least significant
b
.lgu/=2
c
bits. For convenience, we denote2
d.lgu/=2e
(the “up-
per square root” ofu)by
"
p
uand2
b.lgu/=2c
(the “lower square root” ofu)by
#
p
u,
so thatuD
"
p
u
#
p
uand,  whenuis an even power  of2(uD2
2k
for some
integerk),
"
p
uD
#
p
uD
p
u.  Because we now allowuto be an odd power of2,
we must redefine our helpful functions from Section 20.2:
high.x/D

x=
#
p
u
 ̆
;
low.x/Dxmod
#
p
u;
index.x; y/Dx
#
p
uCy:
20.3.1  van Emde Boas trees
Thevan Emde Boas tree,orvEB tree,  modifies  the  proto-vEB  structure.   We
denote a vEB tree with a universe size ofuasEB.u/and,  unlessuequals the
base  size  of2,  the  attributesummarypoints  to  aEB.
"
p
u/tree  and  the  array
clusterŒ0 : :
"
p
u1points to
"
p
uEB.
#
p
u/trees.  As Figure 20.5 illustrates,  a
vEB tree contains two attributes not found in a proto-vEB structure:

minstores the minimum element in the vEB tree, and

maxstores the maximum element in the vEB tree.
Furthermore,  the  element  stored  inmindoes  not  appear  in  any  of  the  recur-
siveEB.
#
p
u/trees  that  theclusterarray  points  to.   The  elements  stored  in  a
EB.u/treeV,  therefore,  areV:minplus  all  the  elements  recursively  stored  in
theEB.
#
p
u/trees pointed to byV:clusterŒ0 : :
"
p
u1.  Note that when a vEB
tree contains two or more elements, we treatminandmaxdifferently:  the element

20.3The van Emde Boas tree547
stored inmindoes not appear in any of the clusters, but the element stored inmax
does.
Since the base size is2,aEB.2/tree does not need the arrayAthat the cor-
respondingproto-EB.2/structure  has.   Instead,  we can  determine  its elements
from itsminandmaxattributes.  In a vEB tree with no elements, regardless of its
universe sizeu, bothminandmaxare
NIL.
Figure 20.6 shows aEB.16/treeVholding the set
f
2; 3; 4; 5; 7; 14; 15
g
.Be-
cause the smallest element is2,V:minequals2, and even though high.2/D0,the
element2does not appear  in theEB.4/tree pointed to byV:clusterŒ0:  notice
thatV:clusterŒ0:minequals3,andso2is not in this vEB tree.  Similarly,  since
V:clusterŒ0:minequals3,and2and3are the only elements inV:clusterŒ0,the
EB.2/clusters withinV:clusterŒ0are empty.
Theminandmaxattributes will turn out to be key to reducing the number of
recursive calls within the operations on vEB trees. These attributes will help us in
four ways:
1.  The M
INIMUMand MAXIMUMoperations do not even need to recurse, for they
can just return the values ofminormax.
2.  The  S
UCCESSORoperation  can  avoid  making  a  recursive  call  to  determine
whether  the successor  of a valuexlies within high.x/.   That  is becausex’s
successor  lies  within  its cluster  if and  only  ifxis strictly  less  than  themax
attribute  of its cluster.   A symmetric argument  holds for  P
REDECESSORand
min.
3.  We can tell whether a vEB tree has no elements, exactly one element, or at least
two elements in constant time from itsminandmaxvalues.  This ability will
help in the I
NSERTand DELETEoperations. Ifminandmaxare bothNIL,then
the vEB tree has no elements. Ifminandmaxare non-
NILbut are equal to each
other, then the vEB tree has exactly one element. Otherwise, bothminandmax
are non-
NILbut are unequal, and the vEB tree has two or more elements.
4.  If we know that a vEB tree is empty, we can insert an element into it by updating
only itsminandmaxattributes. Hence, we can insert into an empty vEB tree in
constant time.  Similarly, if we know that a vEB tree has only one element, we
can delete that element in constant time by updating onlyminandmax.  These
properties will allow us to cut short the chain of recursive calls.
Even  if  the  universe  sizeuis  an  odd  power  of2,  the  difference  in  the  sizes
of the summary vEB tree and the clusters will not turn out to affect the asymptotic
running times of the vEB-tree operations. The recursive procedures that implement
the vEB-tree operations will all have running times characterized by the recurrence
T.u/T.
"
p
u/CO.1/ :(20.4)

548Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
0123
cluster
u16
summary
vEB(16)
min2max15
01
cluster
u4
summary
vEB(4)
min0max3
u2
min0
max1
vEB(2)
u2
min1
max1
vEB(2)
u2
min1
max1
vEB(2)
01
cluster
summary
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
01
cluster
summary
u2
min0
max1
vEB(2)
u2
min1
max1
vEB(2)
u2
min1
max1
vEB(2)
01
clustersummary
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
01
clustersummary
u2
min1
max1
vEB(2)
u2
min
max
vEB(2)
u2
min1
max1
vEB(2)
u4vEB(4)min3max3u4vEB(4)min0max3
u4vEB(4)minmaxu4vEB(4)min2max3
Figure 20.6AEB.16/tree corresponding to the proto-vEB tree in Figure 20.4.  It stores the set
f
2; 3; 4; 5; 7; 14; 15
g
. Slashes indicate
NILvalues. The value stored in theminattribute of a vEB tree
does not appear in any of its clusters. Heavy shading serves the same purpose here as in Figure 20.4.

20.3The van Emde Boas tree549
This recurrence looks similar to recurrence (20.2), and we will solve it in a similar
fashion. LettingmDlgu, we rewrite it as
T.2
m
/T.2
dm=2e
/CO.1/ :
Noting that
d
m=2
e
2m=3for allm2,wehave
T.2
m
/T.2
2m=3
/CO.1/ :
LettingS.m/DT.2
m
/, we rewrite this last recurrence as
S.m/S.2m=3/CO.1/ ;
which,  by case 2 of the master method,  has the solutionS.m/DO.lgm/.  (In
terms of the asymptotic solution,  the fraction2=3does not make any difference
compared with the fraction1=2, because when we apply the master method,  we
find  that  log
3=2
1Dlog
2
1D0:)  Thus,  we  haveT.u/DT.2
m
/DS.m/D
O.lgm/DO.lg lgu/.
Before using a van Emde Boas tree, we must know the universe sizeu,sothat
we can create a van Emde Boas tree of the appropriate size that initially represents
an empty set.  As Problem 20-1 asks you to show, the total space requirement of
a van Emde Boas tree isO.u/, and it is straightforward  to create an empty tree
inO.u/time. In contrast, we can create an empty red-black tree in constant time.
Therefore, we might not want to use a van Emde Boas tree when we perform only
a small  number  of  operations,  since  the  time  to create  the  data  structure  would
exceed the time saved in the individual operations.  This drawback is usually not
significant, since we typically use a simple data structure, such as an array or linked
list, to represent a set with only a few elements.
20.3.2  Operations on a van Emde Boas tree
We are now ready to see how to perform operations on a van Emde Boas tree.  As
we did for the proto van Emde Boas structure, we will consider the querying oper-
ations first, and then I
NSERTand DELETE.  Due to the slight asymmetry between
the minimum and maximum elements in a vEB tree—when a vEB tree contains
at least two elements, the minumum element does not appear within a cluster but
the maximum element does—we will provide pseudocode for all five querying op-
erations.  As in the operations on proto van Emde Boas structures, the operations
here that take parametersVandx,whereVis a van Emde Boas tree andxis an
element, assume that0x<V:u.
Finding the minimum and maximum elements
Because we store the minimum and maximum in the attributesminandmax,two
of the operations are one-liners, taking constant time:

550Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V /
1returnV:min
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V /
1returnV:max
Determining whether a value is in the set
The  procedure
VEB-TREE-MEMBER.V; x/has  a  recursive  case  like  that  of
P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER,  but the base case is a little different.  We also check di-
rectly  whetherxequals  the  minimum  or  maximum  element.   Since  a  vEB  tree
doesn’t store bits as a proto-vEB structure does, we design
VEB-TREE-MEMBER
to returnTRUEorFALSErather than1or0.
VEB-TREE-MEMBER.V; x/
1ifx
==V:minorx==V:max
2return
TRUE
3elseifV:u==2
4return
FALSE
5else returnVEB-TREE-MEMBER.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
Line 1 checks to see whetherxequals either the minimum or maximum element.
If it does,  line 2 returns
TRUE.   Otherwise,  line 3 tests for the base case.  Since
aEB.2/tree has no elements other than those inminandmax, if it is the base
case, line 4 returns
FALSE. The other possibility—it is not a base case andxequals
neitherminnormax—is handled by the recursive call in line 5.
Recurrence (20.4) characterizes the running time of the
VEB-TREE-MEMBER
procedure, and so this procedure takesO.lg lgu/time.
Finding the successor and predecessor
Next we see how to implement the  S
UCCESSORoperation.   Recall that the pro-
cedure  P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR.V; x/could  make  two recursive  calls:  one  to
determine  whetherx’s successor  resides in the same cluster  asxand,  if it does
not, one to find the cluster containingx’s successor.  Because we can access the
maximum value in a vEB tree quickly, we can avoid making two recursive calls,
and instead make one recursive call on either a cluster or on the summary, but not
on both.

20.3The van Emde Boas tree551
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR.V; x/
1ifV:u
==2
2ifx
==0andV:max==1
3return1
4else return
NIL
5elseifV:min¤NILandx<V:min
6returnV:min
7elsemax-lowD
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V:clusterŒhigh.x//
8ifmax-low¤
NILand low.x/ <max-low
9offsetD
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
10returnindex.high.x/;offset/
11elsesucc-clusterD
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR.V:summary;high.x//
12ifsucc-cluster
==NIL
13returnNIL
14elseoffsetDVEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒsucc-cluster/
15returnindex.succ-cluster;offset/
This procedure has sixreturnstatements and several cases.  We start with the
base case in lines 2–4, which returns1in line 3 if we are trying to find the successor
of0and1is in the2-element set; otherwise, the base case returns
NILin line 4.
If we are not in the base case, we next check in line 5 whetherxis strictly less
than the minimum element.  If so, then we simply return the minimum element in
line 6.
If we get to line 7, then we know that we are not in a base case and thatxis
greater than or equal to the minimum value in the vEB treeV.  Line 7 assigns to
max-lowthe maximum element inx’s cluster.  Ifx’s cluster contains some element
that is greater thanx, then we know thatx’s successor lies somewhere withinx’s
cluster.  Line 8 tests for this condition.  Ifx’s successor is withinx’s cluster, then
line 9 determines where in the cluster it is, and line 10 returns the successor in the
same way as line 7 of P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR.
We  get  to  line  11  ifxis  greater  than  or  equal  to  the  greatest  element  in  its
cluster.  In this case, lines 11–15 findx’s successor in the same way as lines 8–12
of P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR.
It is easy to see how recurrence (20.4) characterizes the running time of
VEB-
T
REE-SUCCESSOR.  Depending on the result of the test in line 7, the procedure
calls itself recursively in either line 9 (on a vEB tree with universe size
#
p
u)or
line 11 (on a vEB tree with universe size
"
p
u).  In either case, the one recursive
call is on a vEB tree with universe size at most
"
p
u.  The remainder of the proce-
dure, including the calls to
VEB-TREE-MINIMUMandVEB-TREE-MAXIMUM,
takesO.1/time.  Hence,
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSORruns inO.lg lgu/worst-case
time.

552Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
TheVEB-TREE-PREDECESSORprocedure  is  symmetric  to  theVEB-TREE-
S
UCCESSORprocedure, but with one additional case:
VEB-TREE-PREDECESSOR.V; x/
1ifV:u
==2
2ifx
==1andV:min==0
3return0
4else return
NIL
5elseifV:max¤NILandx>V:max
6returnV:max
7elsemin-lowD
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒhigh.x//
8ifmin-low¤
NILand low.x/ >min-low
9offsetD
VEB-TREE-PREDECESSOR.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
10returnindex.high.x/;offset/
11elsepred-clusterD
VEB-TREE-PREDECESSOR.V:summary;high.x//
12ifpred-cluster
==NIL
13ifV:min¤NILandx>V:min
14returnV:min
15else return
NIL
16elseoffsetDVEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V:clusterŒpred-cluster/
17returnindex.pred-cluster;offset/
Lines 13–14 form the additional case.  This case occurs whenx’s predecessor,
if it exists,  does not reside inx’s  cluster.   In
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR,wewere
assured that ifx’s successor resides outside ofx’s cluster,  then it must reside in
a higher-numbered  cluster.  But ifx’s predecessor  is the minimum value in vEB
treeV,  then  the  successor  resides  in  no  cluster  at  all.   Line  13  checks  for  this
condition, and line 14 returns the minimum value as appropriate.
This  extra  case  does  not  affect  the  asymptotic  running  time  of
VEB-TREE-
P
REDECESSORwhen  compared  withVEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR,andsoVEB-
T
REE-PREDECESSORruns inO.lg lgu/worst-case time.
Inserting an element
Now we examine how to insert an element into a vEB tree.  Recall that P
ROTO-
VEB-INSERTmade two recursive calls: one to insert the element and one to insert
the element’s cluster number into the summary.  The
VEB-TREE-INSERTproce-
dure will make only one recursive call. How can we get away with just one? When
we insert an element, either the cluster that it goes into already has another element
or it does not.  If the cluster already has another element, then the cluster number
is already in the summary, and so we do not need to make that recursive call.  If

20.3The van Emde Boas tree553
the cluster does not already have another element, then the element being inserted
becomes the only element in the cluster, and we do not need to recurse to insert an
element into an empty vEB tree:
VEB-EMPTY-TREE-INSERT.V; x/
1V:minDx
2V:maxDx
With this procedure in hand, here is the pseudocode for
VEB-TREE-INSERT.V; x/,
which  assumes  thatxis  not  already  an  element  in  the  set  represented  by  vEB
treeV:
VEB-TREE-INSERT.V; x/
1ifV:min
==NIL
2VEB-EMPTY-TREE-INSERT.V; x/
3else ifx<V:min
4exchangexwithV:min
5ifV:u>2
6if
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒhigh.x//==NIL
7VEB-TREE-INSERT.V:summary;high.x//
8
VEB-EMPTY-TREE-INSERT.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
9else
VEB-TREE-INSERT.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
10ifx>V:max
11V:maxDx
This procedure works as follows.  Line 1 tests whetherVis an empty vEB tree
and, if it is, then line 2 handles this easy case.  Lines 3–11 assume thatVis not
empty, and therefore some element will be inserted into one ofV’s clusters.  But
that element might not necessarily be the elementxpassed to
VEB-TREE-INSERT.
Ifx<min, as tested in line 3, thenxneeds to become the newmin.  We don’t
want to lose the originalmin, however, and so we need to insert it into one ofV’s
clusters.  In this case, line 4 exchangesxwithmin, so that we insert the original
mininto one ofV’s clusters.
We execute lines 6–9 only ifVis not a base-case vEB tree.  Line 6 determines
whether  the cluster  thatxwill go into is currently  empty.   If so,  then line 7 in-
sertsx’s  cluster  number  into  the  summary  and  line  8  handles  the  easy  case  of
insertingxinto an empty cluster.  Ifx’s cluster is not currently empty, then line 9
insertsxinto  its  cluster.   In  this  case,  we  do  not  need  to  update  the  summary,
sincex’s cluster number is already a member of the summary.
Finally, lines 10–11 take care of updatingmaxifx>max.  Note that ifVis a
base-case vEB tree that is not empty, then lines 3–4 and 10–11 updateminandmax
properly.

554Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
Once again, we can easily see how recurrence (20.4) characterizes the running
time. Depending on the result of the test in line 6, either the recursive call in line 7
(run on a vEB tree with universe size
"
p
u) or the recursive call in line 9 (run on
a vEB with universe size
#
p
u) executes.  In either case, the one recursive call is
on a vEB tree with universe size at most
"
p
u.  Because the remainder  ofVEB-
T
REE-INSERTtakesO.1/time, recurrence (20.4) applies, and so the running time
isO.lg lgu/.
Deleting an element
Finally,  we  look  at  how  to  delete  an  element  from  a  vEB  tree.   The  procedure
VEB-TREE-DELETE.V; x/assumes thatxis currently an element in the set repre-
sented by the vEB treeV.
VEB-TREE-DELETE.V; x/
1ifV:min
==V:max
2V:minD
NIL
3V:maxDNIL
4elseifV:u==2
5ifx
==0
6V:minD1
7elseV:minD0
8V:maxDV:min
9else ifx
==V:min
10first-clusterD
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V:summary/
11xDindex.first-cluster;
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒfirst-cluster//
12V:minDx
13
VEB-TREE-DELETE.V:clusterŒhigh.x/;low.x//
14if
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM.V:clusterŒhigh.x//==NIL
15VEB-TREE-DELETE.V:summary;high.x//
16ifx
==V:max
17summary-maxD
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V:summary/
18ifsummary-max
==NIL
19V:maxDV:min
20elseV:maxDindex.summary-max;
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V:clusterŒsummary-max//
21elseifx
==V:max
22V:maxDindex.high.x/;
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V:clusterŒhigh.x///

20.3The van Emde Boas tree555
TheVEB-TREE-DELETEprocedure works as follows.  If the vEB treeVcon-
tains only one element, then it’s just as easy to delete it as it was to insert an element
into an empty vEB tree:  just setminandmaxto
NIL.  Lines 1–3 handle this case.
Otherwise,Vhas at least two elements. Line 4 tests whetherVis a base-case vEB
tree and, if so, lines 5–8 setminandmaxto the one remaining element.
Lines 9–22 assume thatVhas two or more elements and thatu4.Inthis
case, we will have to delete an element from a cluster. The element we delete from
a cluster  might  not bex,  however,  because  ifxequalsmin,  then once we have
deletedx, some other element within one ofV’s clusters becomes the newmin,
and we have to delete that other element from its cluster. If the test in line 9 reveals
that we are in this case, then line 10 setsfirst-clusterto the number of the cluster
that contains the lowest element other thanmin, and line 11 setsxto the value of
the lowest element in that cluster.  This element becomes the newminin line 12
and, because we setxto its value, it is the element that will be deleted from its
cluster.
When  we reach  line  13,  we  know  that  we need  to  delete  elementxfrom  its
cluster,  whetherxwas the value originally  passed  to
VEB-TREE-DELETEorx
is the element  becoming  the new minimum.   Line 13 deletesxfrom its cluster.
That cluster  might  now become  empty,  which  line 14 tests,  and if  it does,  then
we need to removex’s cluster number from the summary, which line 15 handles.
After updating the summary, we might need to updatemax. Line 16 checks to see
whether we are deleting the maximum element inVand, if we are, then line 17 sets
summary-maxto the number of the highest-numbered nonempty cluster. (The call
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM.V:summary/works because we have already recursively
called
VEB-TREE-DELETEonV:summary, and thereforeV:summary:maxhas al-
ready been updated as necessary.)  If all ofV’s clusters are empty, then the only
remaining element inVismin; line 18 checks for this case, and line 19 updates
maxappropriately.   Otherwise,  line 20 setsmaxto the maximum element in the
highest-numbered  cluster.  (If this cluster is where the element has been deleted,
we again rely on the recursive call in line 13 having already corrected that cluster’s
maxattribute.)
Finally, we have to handle the case in whichx’s cluster did not become empty
due toxbeing deleted.  Although we do not have to update the summary in this
case, we might have to updatemax.  Line 21 tests for this case, and if we have to
updatemax, line 22 does so (again relying on the recursive call to have corrected
maxin the cluster).
Now we show  that
VEB-TREE-DELETEruns  inO.lg lgu/time  in the  worst
case. At first glance, you might think that recurrence (20.4) does not always apply,
because a single call of
VEB-TREE-DELETEcan make two recursive calls:  one
on line 13 and one on line 15.  Although the procedure can make both recursive
calls, let’s think about what happens when it does. In order for the recursive call on

556Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
line 15 to occur, the test on line 14 must show thatx’s cluster is empty.  The only
way thatx’s cluster can be empty is ifxwas the only element in its cluster when
we made the recursive call on line 13. But ifxwas the only element in its cluster,
then that recursive call tookO.1/time, because it executed only lines 1–3.  Thus,
we have two mutually exclusive possibilities:

The recursive call on line 13 took constant time.

The recursive call on line 15 did not occur.
In  either  case,  recurrence  (20.4)  characterizes  the  running  time  of
VEB-TREE-
D
ELETE, and hence its worst-case running time isO.lg lgu/.
Exercises
20.3-1
Modify vEB trees to support duplicate keys.
20.3-2
Modify vEB trees to support keys that have associated satellite data.
20.3-3
Write pseudocode for a procedure that creates an empty van Emde Boas tree.
20.3-4
What happens if you call
VEB-TREE-INSERTwith an element that is already in
the vEB tree? What happens if you call
VEB-TREE-DELETEwith an element that
is not in the vEB tree?  Explain why the procedures exhibit the behavior that they
do.  Show how to modify vEB trees and their operations so that we can check in
constant time whether an element is present.
20.3-5
Suppose that instead of
"
p
uclusters, each with universe size
#
p
u, we constructed
vEB trees to haveu
1= k
clusters, each with universe sizeu
11= k
,wherek>1is a
constant.  If we were to modify the operations appropriately, what would be their
running times? For the purpose of analysis, assume thatu
1= k
andu
11= k
are always
integers.
20.3-6
Creating a vEB tree with universe sizeurequiresO.u/time. Suppose we wish to
explicitly account for that time.  What is the smallest number of operationsnfor
which the amortized time of each operation in a vEB tree isO.lg lgu/?

Problems for Chapter 20557
Problems
20-1  Space requirements for van Emde Boas trees
This problem explores the space requirements for van Emde Boas trees and sug-
gests a way to modify the data structure to make its space requirement depend on
the numbernof elements actually stored in the tree, rather than on the universe
sizeu. For simplicity, assume that
p
uis always an integer.
a.Explain why the following recurrence characterizes the space requirementP.u/
of a van Emde Boas tree with universe sizeu:
P.u/D.
p
uC1/P .
p
u/C‚.
p
u/ :(20.5)
b.Prove that recurrence (20.5) has the solutionP.u/DO.u/.
In order to reduce the space requirements, let us define areduced-space van Emde
Boas tree,orRS-vEB tree, as a vEB treeVbut with the following changes:

The attributeV:cluster, rather than being stored as a simple array of pointers to
vEB trees with universe size
p
u, is a hash table (see Chapter 11) stored as a dy-
namic table (see Section 17.4). Corresponding to the array version ofV:cluster,
the hash table stores pointers to RS-vEB trees with universe size
p
u.Tofind
theith cluster, we look up the keyiin the hash table, so that we can find the
ith cluster by a single search in the hash table.

The hash table stores only pointers to nonempty clusters.  A search in the hash
table for an empty cluster returns
NIL, indicating that the cluster is empty.

The attributeV:summaryisNILif all clusters are empty. Otherwise,V:summary
points to an RS-vEB tree with universe size
p
u.
Because the hash table is implemented with a dynamic table, the space it requires
is proportional to the number of nonempty clusters.
When we need to insert an element into an empty RS-vEB tree, we create the RS-
vEB tree by calling the following procedure, where the parameteruis the universe
size of the RS-vEB tree:
C
REATE-NEW-RS-VEB-TREE.u/
1    allocate a new vEB treeV
2V:uDu
3V:minD
NIL
4V:maxDNIL
5V:summaryDNIL
6    createV:clusteras an empty dynamic hash table
7returnV

558Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
c.Modify theVEB-TREE-INSERTprocedure to produce pseudocode for the pro-
cedure RS-
VEB-TREE-INSERT.V; x/, which insertsxinto the RS-vEB treeV,
calling C
REATE-NEW-RS-VEB-TREEas appropriate.
d.Modify  the
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSORprocedure  to  produce  pseudocode  for
the procedure RS-
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR.V; x/, which returns the successor
ofxin RS-vEB treeV,or
NILifxhas no successor inV.
e.Prove that, under the assumption of simple uniform hashing,  your  RS-
VEB-
T
REE-INSERTand RS-VEB-TREE-SUCCESSORprocedures run inO.lg lgu/
expected time.
f.Assuming that elements are never deleted from a vEB tree, prove that the space
requirement for the RS-vEB tree structure isO.n/,wherenis the number of
elements actually stored in the RS-vEB tree.
g.RS-vEB trees have another advantage over vEB trees: they require less time to
create. How long does it take to create an empty RS-vEB tree?
20-2y-fast tries
This problem investigates D. Willard’s “y-fast tries” which, like van Emde Boas
trees,  perform  each  of  the  operations  M
EMBER,MINIMUM,MAXIMUM,PRE-
DECESSOR,andSUCCESSORon elements drawn from a universe with sizeuin
O.lg lgu/worst-case time.  The I
NSERTand DELETEoperations takeO.lg lgu/
amortized time.  Like reduced-space van Emde Boas trees (see Problem 20-1),y-
fast tries use onlyO.n/space to storenelements. The design ofy-fast tries relies
on perfect hashing (see Section 11.5).
As a preliminary structure, suppose that we create a perfect hash table containing
not only every element in the dynamic set, but every prefix of the binary represen-
tation of every element in the set.  For example, ifuD16,sothatlguD4,and
xD13is in the  set,  then because  the binary  representation  of13is1101,the
perfect hash table would contain the strings1,11,110,and1101.  In addition to
the hash table, we create a doubly linked list of the elements currently in the set, in
increasing order.
a.How much space does this structure require?
b.Show how to perform the M
INIMUMand MAXIMUMoperations inO.1/time;
the M
EMBER,PREDECESSOR,andSUCCESSORoperations inO.lg lgu/time;
and the I
NSERTand DELETEoperations inO.lgu/time.
To reduce the space requirement toO.n/, we make the following changes to the
data structure:

Notes for Chapter 20559

We cluster thenelements inton=lgugroups of size lgu.  (Assume for now
that lgudividesn.) The first group consists of the lgusmallest elements in the
set, the second group consists of the next lgusmallest elements, and so on.

We designate  a “representative”  value for each group.   The representative  of
theith group is at least as large as the largest element in theith group, and it is
smaller than every element of the.iC1/st group. (The representative of the last
group can be the maximum possible elementu1.) Note that a representative
might be a value not currently in the set.

We store the lguelements of each group in a balanced binary search tree, such
as a red-black tree.  Each representative  points to the balanced  binary search
tree for  its group,  and each balanced  binary  search  tree points  to its group’s
representative.

The perfect hash table stores only the representatives, which are also stored in
a doubly linked list in increasing order.
We call this structure ay-fast trie.
c.Show that ay-fast trie requires onlyO.n/space to storenelements.
d.Show how to perform the M
INIMUMand MAXIMUMoperations inO.lg lgu/
time with ay-fast trie.
e.Show how to perform the M
EMBERoperation inO.lg lgu/time.
f.Show  how  to  perform  the  P
REDECESSORand  SUCCESSORoperations  in
O.lg lgu/time.
g.Explain why the I
NSERTand DELETEoperations take.lg lgu/time.
h.Show how to relax the requirement that each group in ay-fast trie has exactly
lguelements to allow I
NSERTand DELETEto run inO.lg lgu/amortized time
without affecting the asymptotic running times of the other operations.
Chapter notes
The data structure in this chapter is named after P. van Emde Boas, who described
an early form of the idea in 1975 [339].  Later papers by van Emde Boas [340]
and van Emde Boas, Kaas, and Zijlstra [341] refined the idea and the exposition.
Mehlhorn and N ̈aher [252] subsequently extended the ideas to apply to universe

560Chapter 20van Emde Boas Trees
sizes that are prime. Mehlhorn’s book [249] contains a slightly different treatment
of van Emde Boas trees than the one in this chapter.
Using the ideas behind van Emde Boas trees, Dementiev et al. [83] developed
a nonrecursive, three-level search tree that ran faster than van Emde Boas trees in
their own experiments.
Wang and Lin [347] designed a hardware-pipelined version of van Emde Boas
trees,  which achieves constant  amortized time per operation  and usesO.lg lgu/
stages in the pipeline.
A lower bound by Pˇatras ̧cu and Thorup [273, 274] for finding the predecessor
shows that van Emde Boas trees are optimal for this operation, even if randomiza-
tion is allowed.

21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
Some applications involve groupingndistinct elements into a collection of disjoint
sets. These applications often need to perform two operations in particular: finding
the unique  set that  contains  a given element  and uniting  two sets.   This chapter
explores methods for maintaining a data structure that supports these operations.
Section 21.1 describes the operations supported by a disjoint-set data structure
and presents a simple application.  In Section 21.2, we look at a simple linked-list
implementation for disjoint sets.  Section 21.3 presents a more efficient represen-
tation using rooted trees.  The running time using the tree representation is theo-
retically superlinear, but for all practical purposes it is linear. Section 21.4 defines
and discusses a very quickly growing function and its very slowly growing inverse,
which appears in the running time of operations on the tree-based implementation,
and then, by a complex amortized analysis, proves an upper bound on the running
time that is just barely superlinear.
21.1  Disjoint-set operations
Adisjoint-set data structuremaintains a collectionSD
f
S
1
;S
2
;:::;S
k
g
of dis-
joint dynamic sets. We identify each set by arepresentative, which is some mem-
ber of the set. In some applications, it doesn’t matter which member is used as the
representative; we care only that if we ask for the representative of a dynamic set
twice without modifying the set between the requests, we get the same answer both
times.  Other applications may require a prespecified rule for choosing the repre-
sentative, such as choosing the smallest member in the set (assuming,  of course,
that the elements can be ordered).
As in the other dynamic-set implementations we have studied, we represent each
element of a set by an object.  Lettingxdenote an object, we wish to support the
following operations:

562Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
MAKE-SET.x/creates  a  new  set  whose  only  member  (and  thus  representative)
isx.  Since the sets are disjoint, we require thatxnot already be in some other
set.
U
NION.x; y/unites the dynamic sets that containxandy, sayS
x
andS
y
,intoa
new set that is the union of these two sets.  We assume that the two sets are dis-
joint prior to the operation. The representative of the resulting set is any member
ofS
x
[S
y
, although many implementations of UNIONspecifically choose the
representative  of eitherS
x
orS
y
as the new representative.   Since we require
the sets in the collection to be disjoint, conceptually we destroy setsS
x
andS
y
,
removing them from the collectionS. In practice, we often absorb the elements
of one of the sets into the other set.
F
IND-SET.x/returns a pointer  to the representative  of the (unique)  set contain-
ingx.
Throughout this chapter, we shall analyze the running times of disjoint-set data
structures in terms of two parameters:n, the number of M
AKE-SEToperations,
andm, the total number of M
AKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SEToperations. Since
the sets  are disjoint,  each  U
NIONoperation  reduces  the number  of  sets by one.
Aftern1U
NIONoperations,  therefore,  only one set remains.  The number of
U
NIONoperations  is  thus  at  mostn1.   Note  also  that  since  the  MAKE-SET
operations are included in the total number of operationsm,wehavemn.We
assume that thenM
AKE-SEToperations are the firstnoperations performed.
An application of disjoint-set data structures
One  of  the  many  applications  of  disjoint-set  data  structures  arises  in  determin-
ing  the  connected  components  of  an  undirected  graph  (see  Section  B.4).   Fig-
ure 21.1(a), for example, shows a graph with four connected components.
The procedure  C
ONNECTED-COMPONENTSthat  follows  uses  the  disjoint-set
operations to compute the connected components of a graph. Once C
ONNECTED-
C
OMPONENTShas  preprocessed  the  graph,  the  procedure  SAME-COMPONENT
answers queries about whether two vertices are in the same connected component.
1
(In pseudocode, we denote the set of vertices of a graphGbyG:Vand the set of
edges byG:E.)
1
When the edges of the graph are static—not changing over time—we can compute the connected
components faster by using depth-first search (Exercise 22.3-12).  Sometimes, however,  the edges
are added dynamically and we need to maintain the connected components as each edge is added. In
this case, the implementation given here can be more efficient than running a new depth-first search
for each new edge.

21.1Disjoint-set operations563
ab
cd
ef
g
h
i
j
Edge processed
initial sets
(b,d)
(e,g)
(a,c)
(h,i)
(a,b)
(e,f)
(b,c)
{a,b,c,d}
{a,b,c,d}
{a,c}
{a,c}
{a}
{a}
{a}
{a,b,c,d}
{b,d}
{b,d}
{b,d}
{b,d}
{b}
{c}
{c}
{c}{d}
{e, f,g}
{e, f,g}
{e,g}
{e,g}
{e,g}
{e,g}
{e}
{e}{f}
{f}
{f}
{f}
{f}
{f}
{g}
{g}
{h,i}
{h,i}
{h,i}
{h,i}
{h}
{h}
{h}
{h}{i}
{i}
{i}
{i}
{j}
{j}
{j}
{j}
{j}
{j}
{j}
{j}
Collection of disjoint sets
(a)
(b)
Figure 21.1  (a)A graph with four connected components:
f
a; b; c; d
g
,
f
e; f; g
g
,
f
h; i
g
,and
f
j
g
.
(b)The collection of disjoint sets after processing each edge.
CONNECTED-COMPONENTS.G/
1foreach vertex2G:V
2M
AKE-SET./
3foreach edge.u; /2G:E
4ifF
IND-SET.u/¤FIND-SET./
5U
NION.u; /
S
AME-COMPONENT.u; /
1ifF
IND-SET.u/==FIND-SET./
2return
TRUE
3else returnFALSE
The procedure  CONNECTED-COMPONENTSinitially  places  each  vertexin its
own set.   Then,  for  each  edge.u; /,  it  unites  the sets  containinguand.By
Exercise 21.1-2, after processing all the edges, two vertices are in the same con-
nected  component  if  and  only  if  the  corresponding  objects  are  in  the  same  set.
Thus,  C
ONNECTED-COMPONENTScomputes sets in such a way that the proce-
dure S
AME-COMPONENTcan determine whether two vertices are in the same con-

564Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
nected  component.   Figure  21.1(b)  illustrates  how  CONNECTED-COMPONENTS
computes the disjoint sets.
In an actual implementation of this connected-components algorithm, the repre-
sentations of the graph and the disjoint-set data structure would need to reference
each  other.   That  is,  an  object  representing  a  vertex  would  contain  a  pointer  to
the corresponding disjoint-set object, and vice versa.  These programming details
depend on the implementation language, and we do not address them further here.
Exercises
21.1-1
Suppose  that  C
ONNECTED-COMPONENTSis run on the undirected  graphGD
.V; E/,whereVD
f
a; b; c; d; e; f; g; h; i; j; k
g
and  the  edges  ofEare  pro-
cessed  in the order.d; i /; .f; k/; .g; i /; .b; g/; .a; h/; .i; j /; .d ; k/; .b; j /; .d ; f /;
.g; j /; .a; e/. List the vertices in each connected component after each iteration of
lines 3–5.
21.1-2
Show that after all edges are processed by C
ONNECTED-COMPONENTS,twover-
tices are in the same connected component if and only if they are in the same set.
21.1-3
During the execution of C
ONNECTED-COMPONENTSon an undirected graphGD
.V; E/withkconnected components, how many times is F
IND-SETcalled?  How
many times is U
NIONcalled? Express your answers in terms of
j
V
j
,
j
E
j
,andk.
21.2  Linked-list representation of disjoint sets
Figure 21.2(a) shows a simple way to implement a disjoint-set data structure: each
set is represented by its own linked list. The object for each set has attributeshead,
pointing  to the first object  in the list,  andtail,  pointing  to the last object.   Each
object in the list contains a set member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and
a pointer back to the set object.  Within each linked list, the objects may appear in
any order. The representative is the set member in the first object in the list.
With this linked-list  representation,  both  M
AKE-SETand FIND-SETare easy,
requiringO.1/time.   To  carry  out  M
AKE-SET.x/,  we  create  a  new  linked  list
whose only object isx.ForF
IND-SET.x/, we just follow the pointer fromxback
to its set object and then return the member in the object thatheadpoints to.  For
example, in Figure 21.2(a), the call F
IND-SET.g/would returnf.

21.2Linked-list representation of disjoint sets565
fgdcheb
(a)
(b)
head
tail
S
1
che
head
tail
S
2
bfgd
head
tail
S
1
Figure 21.2  (a)Linked-list representations of two sets. SetS
1
contains membersd,f,andg, with
representativef,andsetS
2
contains membersb,c,e,andh, with representativec.  Each object in
the list contains a set member, a pointer to the next object in the list, and a pointer back to the set
object.  Each set object has pointersheadandtailto the first and last objects, respectively.(b)The
result of U
NION.g; e/, which appends the linked list containingeto the linked list containingg.The
representative of the resulting set isf. The set object fore’s list,S
2
, is destroyed.
A simple implementation of union
The simplest implementation of the U
NIONoperation using the linked-list set rep-
resentation takes significantly more time than M
AKE-SETor FIND-SET.AsFig-
ure 21.2(b) shows,  we perform  U
NION.x; y/by appendingy’s list onto the end
ofx’s list. The representative ofx’s list becomes the representative of the resulting
set. We use thetailpointer forx’s list to quickly find where to appendy’s list. Be-
cause all members ofy’s list joinx’s list, we can destroy the set object fory’s list.
Unfortunately, we must update the pointer to the set object for each object origi-
nally ony’s list, which takes time linear in the length ofy’s list. In Figure 21.2, for
example, the operation U
NION.g; e/causes pointers to be updated in the objects
forb,c,e,andh.
In fact,  we can easily construct  a sequence  ofmoperations  onnobjects that
requires‚.n
2
/time.   Suppose  that  we have objectsx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
.   We execute
the sequence  ofnM
AKE-SEToperations  followed byn1UNIONoperations
shown in Figure 21.3, so thatmD2n1. We spend‚.n/time performing then
M
AKE-SEToperations.  Because theith UNIONoperation updatesiobjects, the
total number of objects updated by alln1U
NIONoperations is

566Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
OperationNumber of objects updated
MAKE-SET.x
1
/1
M
AKE-SET.x
2
/1
:
:
:
:
:
:
M
AKE-SET.x
n
/1
U
NION.x
2
;x
1
/1
U
NION.x
3
;x
2
/2
U
NION.x
4
;x
3
/3
:
:
:
:
:
:
U
NION.x
n
;x
n1
/n1
Figure 21.3A sequence of2n1operations onnobjects that takes‚.n
2
/time, or‚.n/time
per operation on average, using the linked-list set representation and the simple implementation of
U
NION.
n1
X
iD1
iD‚.n
2
/:
The total number of operations is2n1, and so each operation on average requires
‚.n/time. That is, the amortized time of an operation is‚.n/.
A weighted-union heuristic
In the worst case, the above implementation of the U
NIONprocedure requires an
average  of‚.n/time  per  call  because  we may be  appending  a longer  list  onto
a  shorter  list;  we must  update  the  pointer  to  the  set  object  for  each  member  of
the longer list.  Suppose instead that each list also includes the length of the list
(which we can easily maintain) and that we always append the shorter list onto the
longer, breaking ties arbitrarily.  With this simpleweighted-union heuristic,asin-
gle U
NIONoperation can still take.n/timeifbothsetshave.n/members. As
the following theorem shows, however, a sequence ofmM
AKE-SET,UNION,and
F
IND-SEToperations,nof which are MAKE-SEToperations, takesO.mCnlgn/
time.
Theorem 21.1
Using the linked-list representation of disjoint sets and the weighted-union heuris-
tic, a sequence ofmM
AKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SEToperations,nof which
are M
AKE-SEToperations, takesO.mCnlgn/time.

21.2Linked-list representation of disjoint sets567
ProofBecause  each  UNIONoperation  unites  two  disjoint  sets,  we  perform  at
mostn1U
NIONoperations over all. We now bound the total time taken by these
U
NIONoperations. We start by determining, for each object, an upper bound on the
number of times the object’s pointer back to its set object is updated.  Consider a
particular objectx. We know that each timex’s pointer was updated,xmust have
started in the smaller set.   The first timex’s pointer  was updated,  therefore,  the
resulting set must have had at least2members. Similarly, the next timex’s pointer
was updated, the resulting set must have had at least4members.  Continuing on,
we observe that for anykn, afterx’s pointer has been updated
d
lgk
e
times,
the resulting set must have at leastkmembers.  Since the largest set has at mostn
members, each object’s pointer is updated at most
d
lgn
e
times over all the U
NION
operations.   Thus  the  total  time  spent  updating  object  pointers  over  all  UNION
operations isO.nlgn/.  We must also account for updating thetailpointers and
the list lengths, which take only‚.1/time per U
NIONoperation.  The total time
spent in all U
NIONoperations is thusO.nlgn/.
The time for the entire sequence ofmoperations follows easily.  Each M
AKE-
S
ETand FIND-SEToperation takesO.1/time, and there areO.m/of them.  The
total time for the entire sequence is thusO.mCnlgn/.
Exercises
21.2-1
Write pseudocode  for  M
AKE-SET,FIND-SET,andUNIONusing  the linked-list
representation and the weighted-union heuristic. Make sure to specify the attributes
that you assume for set objects and list objects.
21.2-2
Show the  data  structure  that  results  and  the  answers  returned  by the  F
IND-SET
operations  in the following program.  Use the linked-list  representation  with the
weighted-union heuristic.
1foriD1to16
2M
AKE-SET.x
i
/
3foriD1to15by2
4U
NION.x
i
;x
iC1
/
5foriD1to13by4
6U
NION.x
i
;x
iC2
/
7U
NION.x
1
;x
5
/
8U
NION.x
11
;x
13
/
9U
NION.x
1
;x
10
/
10F
IND-SET.x
2
/
11F
IND-SET.x
9
/

568Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
Assume that if the sets containingx
i
andx
j
have the same size, then the operation
U
NION.x
i
;x
j
/appendsx
j
’s list ontox
i
’s list.
21.2-3
Adapt  the  aggregate  proof  of  Theorem  21.1  to  obtain  amortized  time  bounds
ofO.1/for M
AKE-SETand FIND-SETandO.lgn/for UNIONusing the linked-
list representation and the weighted-union heuristic.
21.2-4
Give a tight asymptotic bound on the running time of the sequence of operations in
Figure 21.3 assuming the linked-list representation and the weighted-union heuris-
tic.
21.2-5
Professor Gompers suspects that it might be possible to keep just one pointer in
each set object, rather than two (headandtail), while keeping the number of point-
ers in each list element at two. Show that the professor’s suspicion is well founded
by describing how to represent each set by a linked list such that each operation
has the same running  time as the operations  described  in this section.   Describe
also how the operations work.  Your scheme should allow for the weighted-union
heuristic, with the same effect as described in this section.  (Hint:Use the tail of a
linked list as its set’s representative.)
21.2-6
Suggest a simple change to the U
NIONprocedure for the linked-list representation
that removes the need to keep thetailpointer to the last object in each list. Whether
or  not  the weighted-union  heuristic  is used,  your  change  should  not  change  the
asymptotic running time of the U
NIONprocedure.  (Hint:Rather than appending
one list to another, splice them together.)
21.3  Disjoint-set forests
In a faster implementation of disjoint sets, we represent sets by rooted trees, with
each node containing one member and each tree representing one set. In adisjoint-
set forest, illustrated in Figure 21.4(a), each member points only to its parent. The
root of each tree contains  the representative  and is its own parent.   As we shall
see,  although  the  straightforward  algorithms  that  use  this  representation  are  no
faster than ones that use the linked-list representation, by introducing two heuris-
tics—“union by rank” and “path compression”—we can achieve an asymptotically
optimal disjoint-set data structure.

21.3Disjoint-set forests569
c
he
b
f
d
g
(a)
f
c
he
b
d
g
(b)
Figure 21.4A disjoint-set  forest.(a)Two trees  representing  the  two sets  of  Figure  21.2.   The
tree on the left represents the set
f
b; c; e; h
g
,withcas the representative, and the tree on the right
represents the set
f
d; f;g
g
, withfas the representative.(b)The result of U
NION.e; g/.
We perform the three disjoint-set operations as follows. A MAKE-SEToperation
simply creates a tree with just one node.  We perform a F
IND-SEToperation by
following parent pointers until we find the root of the tree.  The nodes visited on
this  simple  path  toward  the  root  constitute  thefind path.AU
NIONoperation,
shown in Figure 21.4(b), causes the root of one tree to point to the root of the other.
Heuristics to improve the running time
So far,  we have not improved on the linked-list  implementation.   A sequence  of
n1U
NIONoperations may create a tree that is just a linear chain ofnnodes. By
using two heuristics, however, we can achieve a running time that is almost linear
in the total number of operationsm.
The first heuristic,union by rank, is similar to the weighted-union heuristic we
used with the linked-list representation.  The obvious approach would be to make
the root of the tree with fewer nodes point to the root of the tree with more nodes.
Rather than explicitly keeping track of the size of the subtree rooted at each node,
we shall use an approach that eases the analysis.  For each node,  we maintain a
rank, which is an upper bound on the height of the node.  In union by rank,  we
make the root with smaller rank point to the root with larger rank during a U
NION
operation.
The second heuristic,path compression, is also quite simple and highly effec-
tive. As shown in Figure 21.5, we use it during F
IND-SEToperations to make each
node on the find path point directly to the root. Path compression does not change
any ranks.

570Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
a
b
c
d
e
f
abcde
f
(a)(b)
Figure 21.5Path compression during the operation FIND-SET. Arrows and self-loops at roots are
omitted.(a)A tree representing a setprior to executing F
IND-SET.a/.  Triangles represent subtrees
whose  roots are the  nodes  shown.   Each node  has a pointer  to its parent.(b)The same set after
executing F
IND-SET.a/. Each node on the find path now points directly to the root.
Pseudocode for disjoint-set forests
To implement a disjoint-set forest with the union-by-rank heuristic, we must keep
track of ranks.  With each nodex, we maintain the integer valuex:rank,whichis
an upper bound on the height ofx(the number of edges in the longest simple path
betweenxand a descendant leaf).  When M
AKE-SETcreates a singleton set, the
single node in the corresponding tree has an initial rank of0. Each F
IND-SEToper-
ation leaves all ranks unchanged.  The U
NIONoperation has two cases, depending
on whether the roots of the trees have equal rank.  If the roots have unequal rank,
we make the root with higher rank the parent of the root with lower rank, but the
ranks themselves remain unchanged.   If,  instead,  the roots have equal ranks,  we
arbitrarily choose one of the roots as the parent and increment its rank.
Let  us  put  this  method  into  pseudocode.   We designate  the  parent  of  nodex
byx:p.TheL
INKprocedure, a subroutine called by UNION, takes pointers to two
roots as inputs.

21.3Disjoint-set forests571
MAKE-SET.x/
1x:pDx
2x:rankD0
U
NION.x; y/
1L
INK.FIND-SET.x/;FIND-SET.y//
L
INK.x; y/
1ifx:rank>y:rank
2y:pDx
3elsex:pDy
4ifx:rank
==y:rank
5y:rankDy:rankC1
The F
IND-SETprocedure with path compression is quite simple:
F
IND-SET.x/
1ifx¤x:p
2x:pDF
IND-SET.x:p/
3returnx:p
The F
IND-SETprocedure is atwo-pass method:  as it recurses, it makes one pass
up the find path to find the root, and as the recursion unwinds, it makes a second
pass back down the find path to update each node to point directly to the root. Each
call of F
IND-SET.x/returnsx:pin line 3.  Ifxis the root, then FIND-SETskips
line 2 and instead returnsx:p,whichisx; this is the case in which the recursion
bottoms out. Otherwise, line 2 executes, and the recursive call with parameterx:p
returns a pointer to the root.  Line 2 updates nodexto point directly to the root,
and line 3 returns this pointer.
Effect of the heuristics on the running time
Separately, either union by rank or path compression improves the running time of
the operations on disjoint-set  forests,  and the improvement is even greater when
we use the two heuristics  together.   Alone,  union by rank yields a running  time
ofO.mlgn/(see Exercise 21.4-4), and this bound is tight (see Exercise 21.3-3).
Although  we  shall  not  prove  it  here,  for  a  sequence  ofnM
AKE-SETopera-
tions  (and  hence  at  mostn1U
NIONoperations)  andfFIND-SETopera-
tions,  the  path-compression  heuristic  alone  gives  a  worst-case  running  time  of
‚.nCf.1Clog
2Cf=n
n//.

572Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
When we use both union by rank and path compression, the worst-case running
time isO.m  ̨.n//,where ̨.n/is averyslowly growing function, which we de-
fine in Section 21.4. In any conceivable application of a disjoint-set data structure,
 ̨.n/4; thus, we can view the running time as linear inmin all practical situa-
tions.  Strictly speaking, however, it is superlinear.  In Section 21.4, we prove this
upper bound.
Exercises
21.3-1
Redo Exercise 21.2-2 using a disjoint-set forest with union by rank and path com-
pression.
21.3-2
Write a nonrecursive version of F
IND-SETwith path compression.
21.3-3
Give a sequence ofmM
AKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SEToperations,nof which
are M
AKE-SEToperations, that takes.mlgn/time when we use union by rank
only.
21.3-4
Suppose that we wish to add the operation P
RINT-SET.x/, which is given a nodex
and prints all the members ofx’s set,  in any order.   Show how we can add just
a single attribute to each node in a disjoint-set forest so that P
RINT-SET.x/takes
time linear in the number of members ofx’s set and the asymptotic running times
of the other operations are unchanged.  Assume that we can print each member of
the set inO.1/time.
21.3-5?
Show that any sequence ofmM
AKE-SET,FIND-SET,andLINKoperations, where
all the L
INKoperations appear before any of the FIND-SEToperations, takes only
O.m/time if we use both path compression and union by rank.  What happens in
the same situation if we use only the path-compression heuristic?

21.4Analysis of union by rank with path compression573
?21.4  Analysis of union by rank with path compression
As noted in Section 21.3, the combined union-by-rank and path-compression heu-
ristic runs in timeO.m  ̨.n//formdisjoint-set operations onnelements.  In this
section, we shall examine the function ̨to see just how slowly it grows. Then we
prove this running time using the potential method of amortized analysis.
A very quickly growing function and its very slowly growing inverse
For integersk0andj1, we define the functionA
k
.j /as
A
k
.j /D
(
jC1ifkD0;
A
.jC1/
k1
.j /ifk1;
where the expressionA
.jC1/
k1
.j /uses the functional-iteration notation given in Sec-
tion 3.2.  Specifically,A
.0/
k1
.j /DjandA
.i /
k1
.j /DA
k1
.A
.i1/
k1
.j //fori1.
We will refer to the parameterkas thelevelof the functionA.
The functionA
k
.j /strictly increases with bothjandk. To see just how quickly
this function grows, we first obtain closed-form expressions forA
1
.j /andA
2
.j /.
Lemma 21.2
For any integerj1,wehaveA
1
.j /D2jC1.
ProofWe first use induction onito show thatA
.i /
0
.j /DjCi. For the base case,
we haveA
.0/
0
.j /DjDjC0.  For the inductive step, assume thatA
.i1/
0
.j /D
jC.i1/.ThenA
.i /
0
.j /DA
0
.A
.i1/
0
.j //D.jC.i1//C1DjCi. Finally,
we note thatA
1
.j /DA
.jC1/
0
.j /DjC.jC1/D2jC1.
Lemma 21.3
For any integerj1,wehaveA
2
.j /D2
jC1
.jC1/1.
ProofWe first use induction onito show thatA
.i /
1
.j /D2
i
.jC1/1.For
the base case,  we haveA
.0/
1
.j /DjD2
0
.jC1/1.  For the inductive step,
assume  thatA
.i1/
1
.j /D2
i1
.jC1/1.ThenA
.i /
1
.j /DA
1
.A
.i1/
1
.j //D
A
1
.2
i1
.jC1/1/D2.2
i1
.jC1/1/C1D2
i
.jC1/2C1D2
i
.jC1/1.
Finally, we note thatA
2
.j /DA
.jC1/
1
.j /D2
jC1
.jC1/1.
Now we can see how quicklyA
k
.j /grows by simply examiningA
k
.1/for levels
kD0; 1; 2; 3; 4.   From the definition ofA
0
.k/and the above lemmas,  we have
A
0
.1/D1C1D2,A
1
.1/D21C1D3,andA
2
.1/D2
1C1
.1C1/1D7.

574Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
We also have
A
3
.1/DA
.2/
2
.1/
DA
2
.A
2
.1//
DA
2
.7/
D2
8
81
D2
11
1
D2047
and
A
4
.1/DA
.2/
3
.1/
DA
3
.A
3
.1//
DA
3
.2047/
DA
.2048/
2
.2047/
A
2
.2047/
D2
2048
20481
>2
2048
D.2
4
/
512
D16
512
10
80
;
which is the estimated number of atoms in the observable universe.  (The symbol
“” denotes the “much-greater-than” relation.)
We define the inverse of the functionA
k
.n/, for integern0,by
 ̨.n/Dmin
f
kWA
k
.1/n
g
:
In words, ̨.n/is the lowest levelkfor whichA
k
.1/is at leastn.  From the above
values ofA
k
.1/, we see that
 ̨.n/D
 ̊
0for0n2;
1fornD3;
2for4n7;
3for8n2047 ;
4for2048nA
4
.1/ :
It is only for values ofnso large that the term “astronomical”  understates  them
(greater  thanA
4
.1/,  a  huge  number)  that ̨.n/  >  4,andso ̨.n/4for  all
practical purposes.

21.4Analysis of union by rank with path compression575
Properties of ranks
In the remainder of this section, we prove anO.m  ̨.n//bound on the running time
of the disjoint-set operations with union by rank and path compression. In order to
prove this bound, we first prove some simple properties of ranks.
Lemma 21.4
For all nodesx,wehavex:rankx:p:rank, with strict inequality ifx¤x:p.
The value ofx:rankis initially 0 and increases through time untilx¤x:p; from
then on,x:rankdoes not change.  The value ofx:p:rankmonotonically increases
over time.
ProofThe proof is a straightforward induction on the number of operations, us-
ing  the  implementations  of  M
AKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SETthat  appear  in
Section 21.3. We leave it as Exercise 21.4-1.
Corollary 21.5
As we follow the simple path from any node toward a root, the node ranks strictly
increase.
Lemma 21.6
Every node has rank at mostn1.
ProofEach node’s rank starts at0, and it increases only upon L
INKoperations.
Because there are at mostn1U
NIONoperations,  there are also at mostn1
L
INKoperations.   Because each  LINKoperation  either  leaves all ranks alone or
increases some node’s rank by1, all ranks are at mostn1.
Lemma 21.6 provides a weak bound on ranks.  In fact, every node has rank at
most
b
lgn
c
(see Exercise 21.4-2).  The looser bound of Lemma 21.6 will suffice
for our purposes, however.
Proving the time bound
We shall use the potential method of amortized analysis (see Section 17.3) to prove
theO.m  ̨.n//time bound.  In performing the amortized analysis, we will find it
convenient  to assume that we invoke the L
INKoperation rather than the UNION
operation. That is, since the parameters of the LINKprocedure are pointers to two
roots,  we act as though  we perform  the appropriate  F
IND-SEToperations  sepa-
rately.  The following lemma shows that even if we count the extra F
IND-SETop-
erations induced by U
NIONcalls, the asymptotic running time remains unchanged.

576Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
Lemma 21.7
Suppose we convert a sequenceS
0
ofm
0
MAKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SETop-
erations into a sequenceSofmM
AKE-SET,LINK,andFIND-SEToperations by
turning each U
NIONinto two FIND-SEToperations followed by a LINK.  Then, if
sequenceSruns inO.m  ̨.n//time, sequenceS
0
runs inO.m
0
 ̨.n//time.
ProofSince each U
NIONoperation in sequenceS
0
is converted into three opera-
tions inS,wehavem
0
m3m
0
.SincemDO.m
0
/,anO.m  ̨.n//time bound
for the converted sequenceSimplies anO.m
0
 ̨.n//time bound for the original
sequenceS
0
.
In the remainder of this section, we shall assume that the initial sequence ofm
0
MAKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SEToperations has been converted to a sequence
ofmM
AKE-SET,LINK,andFIND-SEToperations. We now prove anO.m  ̨.n//
time bound  for  the  converted  sequence  and  appeal  to Lemma 21.7 to prove  the
O.m
0
 ̨.n//running time of the original sequence ofm
0
operations.
Potential function
The  potential  function  we  use  assigns  a  potential
q
.x/to  each  nodexin  the
disjoint-set  forest afterqoperations.   We sum the node potentials  for the poten-
tial of the entire forest:ˆ
q
D
P
x

q
.x/,whereˆ
q
denotes the potential of the
forest afterqoperations.  The forest is empty prior to the first operation,  and we
arbitrarily setˆ
0
D0. No potentialˆ
q
will ever be negative.
The value of
q
.x/depends on whetherxis a tree root after theqth operation.
If it is, or ifx:rankD0,then
q
.x/D ̨.n/x:rank.
Now suppose that after theqth operation,xis not a root and thatx:rank1.
We need to define two auxiliary functions onxbefore we can define
q
.x/.  First
we define
level.x/Dmax
f
kWx:p:rankA
k
.x:rank/
g
:
That is,  level.x/is the greatest  levelkfor whichA
k
,  applied tox’s rank,  is no
greater thanx’s parent’s rank.
We claim that
0level.x/ <  ̨.n/ ;(21.1)
which we see as follows. We have
x:p:rankx:rankC1(by Lemma 21.4)
DA
0
.x:rank/(by definition ofA
0
.j /),
which implies that level.x/0, and we have

21.4Analysis of union by rank with path compression577
A
 ̨.n/
.x:rank/A
 ̨.n/
.1/(becauseA
k
.j /is strictly increasing)
n(by the definition of ̨.n/)
>x:p:rank(by Lemma 21.6)  ,
which implies that level.x/  <   ̨.n/.  Note that becausex:p:rankmonotonically
increases over time, so does level.x/.
The second auxiliary function applies whenx:rank1:
iter.x/Dmax
 ̊
iWx:p:rankA
.i /
level.x/
.x:rank/


:
That is,  iter.x/is  the  largest  number  of  times  we can  iteratively  applyA
level.x/
,
applied initially tox’s rank, before we get a value greater thanx’s parent’s rank.
We claim that whenx:rank1,wehave
1iter.x/x:rank;(21.2)
which we see as follows. We have
x:p:rankA
level.x/
.x:rank/(by definition of level.x/)
DA
.1/
level.x/
.x:rank/(by definition of functional iteration)  ,
which implies that iter.x/1, and we have
A
.x:rankC1/
level.x/
.x:rank/DA
level.x/C1
.x:rank/(by definition ofA
k
.j /)
>x:p:rank(by definition of level.x/),
which implies that iter.x/x:rank.  Note that becausex:p:rankmonotonically
increases over time, in order for iter.x/to decrease, level.x/must increase. As long
as level.x/remains unchanged, iter.x/must either increase or remain unchanged.
With these auxiliary functions in place, we are ready to define the potential of
nodexafterqoperations:

q
.x/D
(
 ̨.n/x:rankifxis a root orx:rankD0;
. ̨.n/level.x//x:rankiter.x/ifxis not a root andx:rank1:
We next investigate some useful properties of node potentials.
Lemma 21.8
For every nodex, and for all operation countsq,wehave
0
q
.x/ ̨.n/x:rank:

578Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
ProofIfxis a root orx:rankD0,then
q
.x/D ̨.n/x:rankby definition. Now
suppose thatxis not a root and thatx:rank1. We obtain a lower bound on
q
.x/
by maximizing level.x/and iter.x/. By the bound (21.1), level.x/ ̨.n/1,and
by the bound (21.2), iter.x/x:rank. Thus,

q
.x/D. ̨.n/level.x//x:rankiter.x/
. ̨.n/. ̨.n/1//x:rankx:rank
Dx:rankx:rank
D0:
Similarly, we obtain an upper bound on
q
.x/by minimizing level.x/and iter.x/.
By the bound (21.1), level.x/0, and by the bound (21.2), iter.x/1. Thus,

q
.x/. ̨.n/0/x:rank1
D ̨.n/x:rank1
<    ̨.n/x:rank:
Corollary 21.9
If nodexis not a root andx:rank>0,then
q
.x/ <  ̨.n/x:rank.
Potential changes and amortized costs of operations
We are now ready to examine how the disjoint-set operations affect node potentials.
With an understanding  of the change in potential  due to each operation,  we can
determine each operation’s amortized cost.
Lemma 21.10
Letxbe a node that is not a root, and suppose that theqth operation is either a
L
INKor FIND-SET.  Then after theqth operation,
q
.x/
q1
.x/. Moreover, if
x:rank1and either level.x/or iter.x/changes due to theqth operation,  then

q
.x/
q1
.x/1.Thatis,x’s potential cannot increase, and if it has positive
rank and either level.x/or iter.x/changes, thenx’s potential drops by at least1.
ProofBecausexis not a root,  theqth operation  does not changex:rank,and
becausendoes not change after the initialnM
AKE-SEToperations, ̨.n/remains
unchanged as well.  Hence, these components of the formula forx’s potential re-
main the same after theqth operation. Ifx:rankD0,then
q
.x/D
q1
.x/D0.
Now assume thatx:rank1.
Recall  that  level.x/monotonically  increases  over  time.   If  theqth  operation
leaves  level.x/unchanged,  then  iter.x/either  increases  or  remains  unchanged.
If both  level.x/and iter.x/are unchanged,  then
q
.x/D
q1
.x/.Iflevel.x/

21.4Analysis of union by rank with path compression579
is  unchanged  and  iter.x/increases,   then  it  increases  by  at  least1,andso

q
.x/
q1
.x/1.
Finally, if theqth operation increases level.x/, it increases by at least1,sothat
the  value  of  the  term. ̨.n/level.x//x:rankdrops  by  at  leastx:rank.Be-
cause  level.x/increased,  the  value  of  iter.x/might  drop,  but  according  to  the
bound  (21.2),  the  drop  is  by  at  mostx:rank1.   Thus,  the  increase  in  poten-
tial due to the change in iter.x/is less than the decrease in potential  due to the
change in level.x/, and we conclude that
q
.x/
q1
.x/1.
Our final three lemmas show that the amortized cost of each MAKE-SET,LINK,
and F
IND-SEToperation isO. ̨.n//.  Recall from equation (17.2) that the amor-
tized cost of each operation is its actual cost plus the increase in potential due to
the operation.
Lemma 21.11
The amortized cost of each M
AKE-SEToperation isO.1/.
ProofSuppose that theqth operation is M
AKE-SET.x/.  This operation creates
nodexwith rank0,sothat
q
.x/D0.  No other ranks or potentials change, and
soˆ
q
Dˆ
q1
.  Noting that the actual cost of the MAKE-SEToperation isO.1/
completes the proof.
Lemma 21.12
The amortized cost of each L
INKoperation isO. ̨.n//.
ProofSuppose that theqth operation is L
INK.x; y/. The actual cost of the LINK
operation isO.1/.  Without loss of generality, suppose that the LINKmakesythe
parent ofx.
To determine  the  change  in potential  due  to the  L
INK,  we note  that  the  only
nodes whose potentials may change arex,y, and the children ofyjust prior to the
operation.  We shall show that the only node whose potential can increase due to
the L
INKisy, and that its increase is at most ̨.n/:

By Lemma 21.10, any node that isy’s child just before the LINKcannot have
its potential increase due to the L
INK.

From the definition of
q
.x/, we see that, sincexwas a root just before theqth
operation,
q1
.x/D ̨.n/x:rank.Ifx:rankD0,then
q
.x/D
q1
.x/D0.
Otherwise,

q
.x/   <    ̨.n/x:rank(by Corollary 21.9)
D
q1
.x/ ;
and sox’s potential decreases.

580Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets

Becauseyis a root prior to the LINK,
q1
.y/D ̨.n/y:rank.TheLINK
operation leavesyas a root, and it either leavesy’s rank alone or it increasesy’s
rank by1. Therefore, either
q
.y/D
q1
.y/or
q
.y/D
q1
.y/C ̨.n/.
The increase in potential due to the L
INKoperation, therefore, is at most ̨.n/.
The amortized cost of the L
INKoperation isO.1/C ̨.n/DO. ̨.n//.
Lemma 21.13
The amortized cost of each F
IND-SEToperation isO. ̨.n//.
ProofSuppose that theqth operation is a F
IND-SETand that the find path con-
tainssnodes.   The  actual  cost  of  the  F
IND-SEToperation  isO.s/.Weshall
show  that  no  node’s  potential  increases  due  to  the  F
IND-SETand  that  at  least
max.0; s. ̨.n/C2//nodes  on the find path  have their  potential  decrease  by
at least1.
To see that no node’s potential increases, we first appeal to Lemma 21.10 for all
nodes other than the root. Ifxis the root, then its potential is ̨.n/x:rank,which
does not change.
Now we show that at least max.0; s. ̨.n/C2//nodes have their potential
decrease  by at  least1.Letxbe a node  on the find path such  thatx:rank>0
andxis followed somewhere on the find path by another nodeythat is not a root,
where level.y/Dlevel.x/just before the F
IND-SEToperation.  (Nodeyneed not
immediatelyfollowxon the find path.) All but at most ̨.n/C2nodes on the find
path satisfy these constraints onx. Those that do not satisfy them are the first node
on the find path (if it has rank0), the last node on the path (i.e., the root), and the
last nodewon the path for which level.w/Dk, for eachkD0; 1; 2; : : : ;  ̨.n/1.
Let us fix such a nodex, and we shall show thatx’s potential decreases by at
least1.LetkDlevel.x/Dlevel.y/. Just prior to the path compression caused by
the F
IND-SET,wehave
x:p:rankA
.iter.x//
k
.x:rank/(by definition of iter.x/),
y:p:rankA
k
.y:rank/(by definition of level.y/),
y:rankx:p:rank(by Corollary 21.5 and because
yfollowsxon the find path)  .
Putting these inequalities together and lettingibe the value of iter.x/before path
compression, we have
y:p:rankA
k
.y:rank/
A
k
.x:p:rank/(becauseA
k
.j /is strictly increasing)
A
k
.A
.iter.x//
k
.x:rank//
DA
.iC1/
k
.x:rank/:

21.4Analysis of union by rank with path compression581
Because  path  compression  will  makexandyhave  the  same  parent,  we  know
that after path compression,x:p:rankDy:p:rankand that the path compression
does not decreasey:p:rank.Sincex:rankdoes not change, after path compression
we have thatx:p:rankA
.iC1/
k
.x:rank/.  Thus, path compression will cause ei-
ther iter.x/to increase (to at leastiC1)orlevel.x/to increase (which occurs if
iter.x/increases to at leastx:rankC1). In either case, by Lemma 21.10, we have

q
.x/
q1
.x/1. Hence,x’s potential decreases by at least1.
The amortized cost of the F
IND-SEToperation is the actual cost plus the change
in potential.  The actual cost isO.s/, and we have shown that the total potential
decreases by at least max.0; s. ̨.n/C2//.  The amortized cost, therefore, is at
mostO.s/.s. ̨.n/C2//DO.s/sCO. ̨.n//DO. ̨.n//, since we can
scale up the units of potential to dominate the constant hidden inO.s/.
Putting the preceding lemmas together yields the following theorem.
Theorem 21.14
A sequence ofmM
AKE-SET,UNION,andFIND-SEToperations,nof which are
M
AKE-SEToperations,  can be performed  on a disjoint-set  forest  with union  by
rank and path compression in worst-case timeO.m  ̨.n//.
ProofImmediate from Lemmas 21.7, 21.11, 21.12, and 21.13.
Exercises
21.4-1
Prove Lemma 21.4.
21.4-2
Prove that every node has rank at most
b
lgn
c
.
21.4-3
In light of Exercise 21.4-2, how many bits are necessary to storex:rankfor each
nodex?
21.4-4
Using Exercise 21.4-2, give a simple proof that operations on a disjoint-set forest
with union by rank but without path compression run inO.mlgn/time.
21.4-5
Professor Dante reasons that because node ranks increase strictly along a simple
path to the root, node levels must monotonically increase along the path.  In other

582Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
words,  ifx:rank>0andx:pis not a root,  then level.x/level.x:p/.Isthe
professor correct?
21.4-6?
Consider the function ̨
0
.n/Dmin
f
kWA
k
.1/lg.nC1/
g
. Show that ̨
0
.n/3
for all practical values ofnand, using Exercise 21.4-2, show how to modify the
potential-function argument to prove that we can perform a sequence ofmM
AKE-
S
ET,UNION,andFIND-SEToperations,nof which are MAKE-SEToperations, on
a disjoint-set forest with union by rank and path compression in worst-case time
O.m  ̨
0
.n//.
Problems
21-1  Off-line minimum
Theoff-line minimum problemasks us to maintain a dynamic setTof elements
from the domain
f
1;2;:::;n
g
under the operations  I
NSERTand EXTRACT-MIN.
We are given a sequenceSofnI
NSERTandmEXTRACT-MINcalls, where each
key  in
f
1;2;:::;n
g
is  inserted  exactly  once.   We  wish  to  determine  which  key
is returned by each E
XTRACT-MINcall.  Specifically, we wish to fill in an array
extractedŒ1::m, where foriD1;2;:::;m,extractedŒi is the key returned by
theith  E
XTRACT-MINcall.   The problem  is “off-line”  in the sense  that we are
allowed to process the entire sequenceSbefore determining any of the returned
keys.
a.In  the  following  instance  of  the  off-line  minimum  problem,  each  operation
I
NSERT.i /is  represented  by  the  value  ofiand  each  EXTRACT-MINis  rep-
resented by the letter E:
4; 8;E;3;E;9;2;6;E;E;E;1;7;E;5 :
Fill in the correct values in theextractedarray.
To develop an algorithm for this problem, we break the sequenceSinto homoge-
neous subsequences. That is, we representSby
I
1
;E;I
2
;E;I
3
;:::;I
m
;E;I
mC1
;
where each E represents a single E
XTRACT-MINcall and each I
j
represents a (pos-
sibly empty) sequence of I
NSERTcalls. For each subsequence I
j
, we initially place
the keys inserted by these operations into a setK
j
, which is empty if I
j
is empty.
We then do the following:

Problems for Chapter 21583
OFF-LINE-MINIMUM.m; n/
1foriD1ton
2determinejsuch thati2K
j
3ifj¤mC1
4extractedŒj Di
5letlbe the smallest value greater thanj
for which setK
l
exists
6K
l
DK
j
[K
l
, destroyingK
j
7returnextracted
b.Argue that the arrayextractedreturned by O
FF-LINE-MINIMUMis correct.
c.Describe how to implement  O
FF-LINE-MINIMUMefficiently with a disjoint-
set data structure.  Give a tight bound on the worst-case running time of your
implementation.
21-2  Depth determination
In thedepth-determination problem,  we maintain a forestFD
f
T
i
g
of rooted
trees under three operations:
M
AKE-TREE./creates a tree whose only node is.
F
IND-DEPTH./returns the depth of nodewithin its tree.
G
RAFT.r; /makes noder, which is assumed to be the root of a tree, become the
child of node, which is assumed to be in a different tree thanrbut may or may
not itself be a root.
a.Suppose that we use a tree representation  similar to a disjoint-set forest::p
is the parent  of node,  except that:pDifis a root.  Suppose further
that we implement G
RAFT.r; /by settingr:pDand FIND-DEPTH./by
following the find path up to the root, returning a count of all nodes other than
encountered. Show that the worst-case running time of a sequence ofmM
AKE-
T
REE,FIND-DEPTH,andGRAFToperations is‚.m
2
/.
By using the union-by-rank  and path-compression  heuristics,  we can reduce the
worst-case  running  time.   We use  the  disjoint-set  forestSD
f
S
i
g
,  where  each
setS
i
(which is itself a tree) corresponds  to a treeT
i
in the forestF.  The tree
structure within a setS
i
, however, does not necessarily correspond to that ofT
i
.In
fact, the implementation ofS
i
does not record the exact parent-child relationships
but nevertheless allows us to determine any node’s depth inT
i
.
The key idea is to maintain in each nodea “pseudodistance”:d,whichis
defined so that the sum of the pseudodistances along the simple path fromto the

584Chapter 21Data Structures for Disjoint Sets
root of its setS
i
equals the depth ofinT
i
. That is, if the simple path fromto its
root inS
i
is
0
;
1
;:::;
k
,where
0
Dand
k
isS
i
’s root, then the depth of
inT
i
is
P
k
jD0

j
:d.
b.Give an implementation of M
AKE-TREE.
c.Show how to modify F
IND-SETto implement FIND-DEPTH.  Your implemen-
tation should perform path compression, and its running time should be linear
in  the  length  of  the  find path.   Make  sure  that  your  implementation  updates
pseudodistances correctly.
d.Show how to implement G
RAFT.r; /, which combines the sets containingr
and, by modifying the U
NIONand LINKprocedures.  Make sure that your
implementation updates pseudodistances correctly. Note that the root of a setS
i
is not necessarily the root of the corresponding treeT
i
.
e.Give a tight bound on the worst-case running time of a sequence ofmM
AKE-
T
REE,FIND-DEPTH,andGRAFToperations,nof which are MAKE-TREEop-
erations.
21-3  Tarjan’s off-line least-common-ancestors algorithm
Theleast common ancestorof two nodesuandin a rooted treeTis the nodew
that  is an ancestor  of bothuandand that has the greatest  depth inT.Inthe
off-line least-common-ancestors problem,  we are given a rooted  treeTand an
arbitrary setPD
ff
u; 
gg
of unordered pairs of nodes inT, and we wish to deter-
mine the least common ancestor of each pair inP.
To solve the off-line least-common-ancestors problem, the following procedure
performs a tree walk ofTwith the initial call LCA.T:root/. We assume that each
node is colored
WHITEprior to the walk.
LCA.u/
1M
AKE-SET.u/
2F
IND-SET.u/:ancestorDu
3foreach childofuinT
4LCA./
5U
NION.u; /
6F
IND-SET.u/:ancestorDu
7u:colorD
BLACK
8foreach nodesuch that
f
u; 
g
2P
9if:color
==BLACK
10print “The least common ancestor of”
u“and”“is” F
IND-SET./:ancestor

Notes for Chapter 21585
a.Argue that line 10 executes exactly once for each pair
f
u; 
g
2P.
b.Argue that at the time of the call LCA.u/, the number of sets in the disjoint-set
data structure equals the depth ofuinT.
c.Prove that LCA correctly prints the least common ancestor ofuandfor each
pair
f
u; 
g
2P.
d.Analyze the running time of LCA, assuming that we use the implementation of
the disjoint-set data structure in Section 21.3.
Chapter notes
Many of the important results for disjoint-set data structures are due at least in part
to R. E. Tarjan.   Using aggregate analysis,  Tarjan [328, 330] gave the first tight
upper bound in terms of the very slowly growing inversey ̨.m; n/of Ackermann’s
function.   (The functionA
k
.j /giveninSection21.4issimilartoAckermann’s
function, and the function ̨.n/is similar to the inverse.  Both ̨.n/andy ̨.m; n/
are at most4for all conceivable values ofmandn.)  AnO.mlg

n/upper bound
was proven earlier by Hopcroft and Ullman [5, 179]. The treatment in Section 21.4
is adapted from a later analysis by Tarjan [332], which is in turn based on an anal-
ysis by Kozen [220].  Harfst and Reingold [161] give a potential-based version of
Tarjan’s earlier bound.
Tarjan and van Leeuwen [333] discuss variants on the path-compression heuris-
tic, including “one-pass methods,” which sometimes offer better constant factors
in their performance than do two-pass methods.  As with Tarjan’s earlier analyses
of the basic path-compression heuristic, the analyses by Tarjan and van Leeuwen
are aggregate. Harfst and Reingold [161] later showed how to make a small change
to the potential function to adapt their path-compression analysis to these one-pass
variants. Gabow and Tarjan [121] show that in certain applications, the disjoint-set
operations can be made to run inO.m/time.
Tarjan [329] showed that a lower bound of.my ̨.m; n//time is required for
operations on any disjoint-set data structure satisfying certain technical conditions.
This lower bound was later generalized by Fredman and Saks [113], who showed
that in the worst case,.my ̨.m; n// .lgn/-bit words of memory must be accessed.

VI  Graph Algorithms

Introduction
Graph problems pervade computer science, and algorithms for working with them
are fundamental to the field.  Hundreds of interesting computational problems are
couched in terms of graphs. In this part, we touch on a few of the more significant
ones.
Chapter 22 shows how we can represent a graph in a computer and then discusses
algorithms based on searching a graph using either breadth-first search or depth-
first search. The chapter gives two applications of depth-first search: topologically
sorting a directed acyclic graph and decomposing a directed graph into its strongly
connected components.
Chapter  23  describes  how  to  compute  a  minimum-weight  spanning  tree  of  a
graph:  the least-weight way of connecting all of the vertices together when each
edge has an associated weight.  The algorithms for computing minimum spanning
trees serve as good examples of greedy algorithms (see Chapter 16).
Chapters 24 and 25 consider  how to compute shortest  paths between vertices
when each edge has an associated length or “weight.”  Chapter 24 shows how to
find shortest paths from a given source vertex to all other vertices, and Chapter 25
examines methods to compute shortest paths between every pair of vertices.
Finally, Chapter 26 shows how to compute a maximum flow of material in a flow
network, which is a directed graph having a specified source vertex of material, a
specified sink vertex, and specified capacities for the amount of material that can
traverse  each  directed  edge.   This general  problem  arises  in  many forms,  and  a
good algorithm for computing maximum flows can help solve a variety of related
problems efficiently.

588Part VI    Graph Algorithms
When we characterize the running time of a graph algorithm on a given graph
GD.V; E/, we usually measure the size of the input in terms of the number of
vertices
j
V
j
and the number of edges
j
E
j
of the graph.  That is, we describe the
size of the input with two parameters, not just one. We adopt a common notational
convention for these parameters.  Inside asymptotic notation (such asO-notation
or‚-notation),  andonlyinside  such  notation,  the  symbolVdenotes
j
V
j
and
the  symbolEdenotes
j
E
j
.   For example,  we might  say,  “the algorithm  runs  in
timeO.VE/,” meaning that the algorithm runs in timeO.
j
V
jj
E
j
/.  This conven-
tion makes the running-time formulas easier to read, without risk of ambiguity.
Another convention we adopt appears in pseudocode.  We denote the vertex set
of a graphGbyG:Vand its edge set byG:E. That is, the pseudocode views vertex
and edge sets as attributes of a graph.

22Elementary Graph Algorithms
This chapter presents methods for representing a graph and for searching a graph.
Searching a graph means systematically following the edges of the graph so as to
visit  the vertices  of the graph.   A graph-searching  algorithm  can discover  much
about  the structure  of  a graph.   Many algorithms  begin by searching  their  input
graph to obtain this structural information.  Several other graph algorithms elabo-
rate on basic graph searching.  Techniques for searching a graph lie at the heart of
the field of graph algorithms.
Section 22.1 discusses the two most common computational representations of
graphs: as adjacency lists and as adjacency matrices.  Section 22.2 presents a sim-
ple graph-searching  algorithm  called breadth-first  search and shows how to cre-
ate a breadth-first tree.  Section 22.3 presents depth-first search and proves some
standard  results  about the order in which depth-first  search  visits vertices.   Sec-
tion 22.4 provides our first real application of depth-first search: topologically sort-
ing a directed acyclic graph. A second application of depth-first search, finding the
strongly connected components of a directed graph, is the topic of Section 22.5.
22.1  Representations of graphs
We  can  choose  between  two  standard  ways  to  represent  a  graphGD.V; E/:
as a collection  of adjacency  lists or as an adjacency  matrix.   Either way applies
to both directed and undirected graphs.  Because the adjacency-list representation
provides a compact way to representsparsegraphs—those for which
j
E
j
is much
less than
j
V
j
2
—it is usually the method of choice.  Most of the graph algorithms
presented  in  this  book  assume  that  an  input  graph  is  represented  in  adjacency-
list form.  We may prefer an adjacency-matrix representation,  however, when the
graph isdense—
j
E
j
is close to
j
V
j
2
—or when we need to be able to tell quickly
if there is an edge connecting two given vertices. For example, two of the all-pairs

590Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
12
3
45
1
2
3
4
5
25
1
2
2
412
53
4
453
1001
0111
1010
1101
1010
0
1
0
0
1
12345
1
2
3
4
5
(a)(b)(c)
Figure 22.1Two representations of an undirected graph.(a)An undirected graphGwith 5 vertices
and7edges.(b)An adjacency-list representation ofG.(c)The adjacency-matrix representation
ofG.
12
54
1
2
3
4
5
24
5
6
2
4
6
5
1010
0001
0001
1000
0010
0
0
0
0
0
12345
1
2
3
4
5
(a)(b)(c)
3
66
6
6000001
0
0
1
0
0
Figure 22.2Two representations of a directed graph.(a)A directed graphGwith 6 vertices and 8
edges.(b)An adjacency-list representation ofG.(c)The adjacency-matrix representation ofG.
shortest-paths  algorithms presented in Chapter 25 assume that their input graphs
are represented by adjacency matrices.
Theadjacency-list representationof  a  graphGD.V; E/consists  of  an  ar-
rayAdjof
j
V
j
lists, one for each vertex inV.  For eachu2V, the adjacency list
AdjŒucontains all the verticessuch that there is an edge.u; /2E.Thatis,
AdjŒuconsists of all the vertices adjacent touinG. (Alternatively, it may contain
pointers to these vertices.) Since the adjacency lists represent the edges of a graph,
in pseudocode we treat the arrayAdjas an attribute of the graph, just as we treat
the edge setE.  In pseudocode, therefore, we will see notation such asG:AdjŒu.
Figure 22.1(b) is an adjacency-list  representation of the undirected graph in Fig-
ure  22.1(a).   Similarly,  Figure  22.2(b)  is  an  adjacency-list  representation  of  the
directed graph in Figure 22.2(a).
IfGis a directed graph, the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency lists is
j
E
j
,
since an edge of the form.u; /is represented by havingappear inAdjŒu.IfGis

22.1Representations of graphs591
an undirected graph, the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency lists is2
j
E
j
,since
if.u; /is an undirected edge, thenuappears in’s adjacency list and vice versa.
For both directed and undirected graphs, the adjacency-list representation has the
desirable property that the amount of memory it requires is‚.VCE/.
We can readily adapt adjacency lists to representweighted graphs, that is, graphs
for which each edge has an associatedweight, typically given by aweight function
wWE!R.   For example,  letGD.V; E/be a weighted  graph  with weight
functionw.   We  simply  store  the  weightw.u; /of  the  edge.u; /2Ewith
vertexinu’s adjacency list.  The adjacency-list representation is quite robust in
that we can modify it to support many other graph variants.
A potential disadvantage of the adjacency-list representation is that it provides
no quicker way to determine whether a given edge.u; /is present in the graph
than to search forin the adjacency listAdjŒu.  An adjacency-matrix representa-
tion of the graph remedies this disadvantage, but at the cost of using asymptotically
more memory. (See Exercise 22.1-8 for suggestions of variations on adjacency lists
that permit faster edge lookup.)
For theadjacency-matrix representationof a graphGD.V; E/, we assume
that the vertices are numbered1;2;:::;
j
V
j
in some arbitrary manner.  Then the
adjacency-matrix  representation  of  a  graphGconsists  of  a
j
V
j
	
j
V
j
matrix
AD.a
ij
/such that
a
ij
D
(
1if.i; j /2E;
0otherwise:
Figures 22.1(c) and 22.2(c) are the adjacency matrices of the undirected and di-
rected graphs in Figures 22.1(a) and 22.2(a), respectively. The adjacency matrix of
a graph requires‚.V
2
/memory, independent of the number of edges in the graph.
Observe the symmetry along the main diagonal of the adjacency matrix in Fig-
ure  22.1(c).   Since in  an undirected  graph,.u; /and.; u/represent  the  same
edge, the adjacency matrixAof an undirected graph is its own transpose:ADA
T
.
In some applications, it pays to store only the entries on and above the diagonal of
the adjacency matrix, thereby cutting the memory needed to store the graph almost
in half.
Like the adjacency-list representation of a graph, an adjacency matrix can repre-
sent a weighted graph. For example, ifGD.V; E/is a weighted graph with edge-
weight functionw, we can simply store the weightw.u; /of the edge.u; /2E
as the entry in rowuand columnof the adjacency matrix.  If an edge does not
exist, we can store a
NILvalue as its corresponding matrix entry, though for many
problems it is convenient to use a value such as0or1.
Although the adjacency-list  representation  is asymptotically  at least as space-
efficient as the adjacency-matrix  representation,  adjacency  matrices  are simpler,
and so we may prefer them when graphs are reasonably small.  Moreover,  adja-

592Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
cency matrices carry a further advantage for unweighted graphs: they require only
one bit per entry.
Representing attributes
Most  algorithms  that  operate  on  graphs  need  to  maintain  attributes  for  vertices
and/or  edges.  We indicate these attributes using our usual notation,  such as:d
for an attributedof a vertex.  When we indicate edges as pairs of vertices, we
use the same style of notation.  For example, if edges have an attributef,thenwe
denote this attribute for edge.u; /by.u; /:f. For the purpose of presenting and
understanding algorithms, our attribute notation suffices.
Implementing vertex and edge attributes in real programs can be another story
entirely.  There is no one best way to store and access vertex and edge attributes.
For a given situation,  your decision will likely depend on the programming lan-
guage you are using, the algorithm you are implementing, and how the rest of your
program uses the graph. If you represent a graph using adjacency lists, one design
represents  vertex attributes  in additional  arrays,  such as an arraydŒ1::
j
V
j
that
parallels theAdjarray. If the vertices adjacent touare inAdjŒu, then what we call
the attributeu:dwould actually be stored in the array entrydŒu. Many other ways
of implementing attributes are possible.  For example, in an object-oriented  pro-
gramming language,  vertex attributes  might be represented  as instance variables
within a subclass of aVertexclass.
Exercises
22.1-1
Given an adjacency-list representation of a directed graph, how long does it take
to compute the out-degree of every vertex?  How long does it take to compute the
in-degrees?
22.1-2
Give an adjacency-list representation for a complete binary tree on7vertices. Give
an equivalent adjacency-matrix representation. Assume that vertices are numbered
from1to7as in a binary heap.
22.1-3
Thetransposeof a directed graphGD.V; E/is the graphG
T
D.V; E
T
/,where
E
T
D
f
.; u/2V	VW.u; /2E
g
.  Thus,G
T
isGwith all its edges reversed.
Describe efficient algorithms for computingG
T
fromG, for both the adjacency-
list and adjacency-matrix representations ofG. Analyze the running times of your
algorithms.

22.1Representations of graphs593
22.1-4
Given an adjacency-list  representation  of a multigraphGD.V; E/, describe an
O.VCE/-time  algorithm  to  compute  the  adjacency-list  representation  of  the
“equivalent” undirected graphG
0
D.V; E
0
/,whereE
0
consists of the edges inE
with all multiple edges between two vertices replaced by a single edge and with all
self-loops removed.
22.1-5
Thesquareof a directed graphGD.V; E/is the graphG
2
D.V; E
2
/such that
.u; /2E
2
if and onlyGcontains a path with at most two edges betweenuand.
Describe efficient algorithms  for computingG
2
fromGfor both the adjacency-
list and adjacency-matrix representations ofG. Analyze the running times of your
algorithms.
22.1-6
Most graph  algorithms  that take an adjacency-matrix  representation  as input  re-
quire time.V
2
/, but there are some exceptions. Show how to determine whether
a directed graphGcontains auniversal sink—a vertex with in-degree
j
V
j
1and
out-degree0—in timeO.V /, given an adjacency matrix forG.
22.1-7
Theincidence matrixof  a  directed  graphGD.V; E/with  no  self-loops  is  a
j
V
j
	
j
E
j
matrixBD.b
ij
/such that
b
ij
D

1if edgejleaves vertexi;
1if edgejenters vertexi;
0otherwise:
Describe what the entries of the matrix productBB
T
represent,  whereB
T
is the
transpose ofB.
22.1-8
Suppose that instead of a linked list, each array entryAdjŒuis a hash table contain-
ing the verticesfor which.u; /2E. If all edge lookups are equally likely, what
is the expected time to determine whether an edge is in the graph? What disadvan-
tages does this scheme have? Suggest an alternate data structure for each edge list
that solves these problems. Does your alternative have disadvantages compared to
the hash table?

594Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
22.2  Breadth-first search
Breadth-first searchis one of the simplest algorithms for searching a graph and
the archetype for many important graph algorithms.  Prim’s minimum-spanning-
tree algorithm (Section 23.2) and Dijkstra’s single-source shortest-paths algorithm
(Section 24.3) use ideas similar to those in breadth-first search.
Given a graphGD.V; E/and a distinguishedsourcevertexs,  breadth-first
search  systematically  explores  the edges ofGto “discover”  every vertex that is
reachable  froms.   It  computes  the  distance  (smallest  number  of  edges)  froms
to each reachable  vertex.   It also produces  a “breadth-first  tree” with rootsthat
contains all reachable vertices. For any vertexreachable froms, the simple path
in the breadth-first tree fromstocorresponds to a “shortest path” fromsto
inG, that is, a path containing the smallest number of edges. The algorithm works
on both directed and undirected graphs.
Breadth-first search is so named because it expands the frontier between discov-
ered and undiscovered vertices uniformly across the breadth of the frontier.  That
is, the algorithm discovers all vertices at distancekfromsbefore discovering any
vertices at distancekC1.
To keep track of progress, breadth-first search colors each vertex white, gray, or
black.  All vertices start out white and may later become gray and then black.  A
vertex isdiscoveredthe first time it is encountered during the search, at which time
it becomes nonwhite. Gray and black vertices, therefore, have been discovered, but
breadth-first search distinguishes between them to ensure that the search proceeds
in  a  breadth-first  manner.
1
If.u; /2Eand  vertexuis  black,  then  vertex
is either  gray  or black;  that is,  all vertices  adjacent  to black  vertices  have  been
discovered.  Gray vertices may have some adjacent white vertices; they represent
the frontier between discovered and undiscovered vertices.
Breadth-first search constructs a breadth-first tree,  initially containing  only its
root, which is the source vertexs. Whenever the search discovers a white vertex
in the course of scanning the adjacency list of an already discovered vertexu,the
vertexand the edge.u; /are added to the tree. We say thatuis thepredecessor
orparentofin the breadth-first tree. Since a vertex is discovered at most once, it
has at most one parent.  Ancestor and descendant relationships in the breadth-first
tree are defined relative to the rootsas usual: ifuis on the simple path in the tree
from the rootsto vertex,thenuis an ancestor ofandis a descendant ofu.
1
We distinguish between gray and black verticesto help us understand how breadth-first search op-
erates. In fact, as Exercise 22.2-3 shows, we would get the same result even if we did not distinguish
between gray and black vertices.

22.2Breadth-first search595
The  breadth-first-search  procedure  BFS  below  assumes  that  the  input  graph
GD.V; E/is represented  using  adjacency  lists.   It  attaches  several  additional
attributes to each vertex in the graph.  We store the color of each vertexu2V
in the attributeu:colorand the predecessor ofuin the attributeu: .Ifuhas no
predecessor (for example, ifuDsoruhas not been discovered), thenu: D
NIL.
The attributeu:dholds the distance from the sourcesto vertexucomputed by the
algorithm.  The algorithm also uses a first-in, first-out queueQ(see Section 10.1)
to manage the set of gray vertices.
BFS.G; s/
1foreach vertexu2G:V
f
s
g
2u:colorD
WHITE
3u:dD1
4u: D
NIL
5s:colorDGRAY
6s:dD0
7s:D
NIL
8QD;
9E
NQUEUE.Q; s/
10whileQ¤;
11uDD
EQUEUE.Q/
12foreach2G:AdjŒu
13if:color
==WHITE
14:colorDGRAY
15:dDu:dC1
16:Du
17E
NQUEUE.Q; /
18u:colorD
BLACK
Figure 22.3 illustrates the progress of BFS on a sample graph.
The procedure BFS works as follows. With the exception of the source vertexs,
lines 1–4 paint every vertex white, setu:dto be infinity for each vertexu, and set
the parent of every vertex to be
NIL. Line 5 paintssgray, since we consider it to be
discovered as the procedure begins.  Line 6 initializess:dto0,andline7setsthe
predecessor of the source to be
NIL. Lines 8–9 initializeQto the queue containing
just the vertexs.
Thewhileloop  of  lines  10–18  iterates  as long  as  there  remain  gray  vertices,
which are discovered vertices that have not yet had their adjacency lists fully ex-
amined. Thiswhileloop maintains the following invariant:
At the test in line 10, the queueQconsists of the set of gray vertices.

596Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
rstu
vwx y
0∞∞∞
∞∞∞∞
s
0
Q(a)
tu
vwx y
01∞∞
∞∞∞1
w
1
Q(b)r
1
tu
vwx y
012∞
∞2∞1
Q(c)r
1
tu
vwx y
01∞
∞
Q(d)
(e)(f)
(g)(h)
Q(i)
rs
rsrs
t
2
x
2
2
212
t
2
x
2
v
2
tu
vwx y
01
∞
Q
rs
2
212
x
2
v
2
u
3
3
tu
vwx y
01
3
Q
rs
2
212
v
2
u
3
3
y
3
tu
vwx y
01
3
Q
rs
2
21
u
3
3
y
32
tu
vwx y
01
3
Q
rs
2
21
3
y
32
tu
vwx y
01
rs
2
21
3
23
;
Figure 22.3The operation of BFS on an undirected graph.  Tree edges are shown shaded as they
are produced by BFS. The value ofu:dappears within each vertexu. The queueQis shown at the
beginning of each iteration of thewhileloop of lines 10–18. Vertex distances appear below vertices
in the queue.
Although we won’t use this loop invariant  to prove correctness,  it is easy to see
that it holds prior to the first iteration and that each iteration of the loop maintains
the invariant.  Prior to the first iteration, the only gray vertex, and the only vertex
inQ, is the source vertexs.  Line 11 determines the gray vertexuat the head of
the queueQand removes it fromQ.Theforloop of lines 12–17 considers each
vertexin the adjacency list ofu.Ifis white, then it has not yet been discovered,
and  the  procedure  discovers  it  by  executing  lines  14–17.   The  procedure  paints
vertexgray, sets its distance:dtou:dC1, recordsuas its parent:, and places
it at the tail of the queueQ. Once the procedure has examined all the vertices onu’s

22.2Breadth-first search597
adjacency list, it blackensuin line 18.  The loop invariant is maintained because
whenever a vertex is painted gray (in line 14) it is also enqueued (in line 17), and
whenever a vertex is dequeued (in line 11) it is also painted black (in line 18).
The results of breadth-first search may depend upon the order in which the neigh-
bors of a given vertex are visited in line 12: the breadth-first tree may vary, but the
distancesdcomputed by the algorithm will not. (See Exercise 22.2-5.)
Analysis
Before proving the various properties of breadth-first search, we take on the some-
what easier job of analyzing its running time on an input graphGD.V; E/.We
use aggregate analysis, as we saw in Section 17.1. After initialization, breadth-first
search never whitens a vertex, and thus the test in line 13 ensures that each vertex
is enqueued at most once,  and hence dequeued at most once.  The operations of
enqueuing and dequeuing takeO.1/time, and so the total time devoted to queue
operations isO.V /. Because the procedure scans the adjacency list of each vertex
only when the vertex is dequeued, it scans each adjacency list at most once. Since
the sum of the lengths of all the adjacency lists is‚.E/, the total time spent in
scanning  adjacency  lists isO.E/.   The overhead  for initialization  isO.V /,and
thus the total running time of the BFS procedure isO.VCE/. Thus, breadth-first
search runs in time linear in the size of the adjacency-list representation ofG.
Shortest paths
At the beginning of this section, we claimed that breadth-first search finds the dis-
tance to each reachable vertex in a graphGD.V; E/from a given source vertex
s2V.Definetheshortest-path distanceı.s; /fromstoas the minimum num-
ber of edges in any path from vertexsto vertex; if there is no path fromsto,
thenı.s; /D1.  We call a path of lengthı.s; /fromstoashortest path
2
fromsto. Before showing that breadth-first search correctly computes shortest-
path distances, we investigate an important property of shortest-path distances.
2
In Chapters 24 and 25, we shall generalize our study of shortest paths to weighted graphs, in which
every edge has a real-valued weight and the weight of a path is the sum of the weights of its con-
stituent edges.   The graphs  considered  in the  present  chapter  are  unweighted  or,  equivalently,  all
edges have unit weight.

598Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
Lemma 22.1
LetGD.V; E/be a directed or undirected graph, and lets2Vbe an arbitrary
vertex. Then, for any edge.u; /2E,
ı.s; /ı.s; u/C1:
ProofIfuis reachable froms,thensois. In this case, the shortest path froms
tocannot be longer than the shortest path fromstoufollowed by the edge.u; /,
and thus the inequality holds.  Ifuis not reachable froms,thenı.s; u/D1,and
the inequality holds.
We  want  to  show  that  BFS  properly  computes:dDı.s; /for  each  ver-
tex2V. We first show that:dboundsı.s; /from above.
Lemma 22.2
LetGD.V; E/be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is run
onGfrom a given source vertexs2V.  Then upon termination,  for each ver-
tex2V,thevalue:dcomputed by BFS satisfies:dı.s; /.
ProofWe use induction on the number of E
NQUEUEoperations.  Our inductive
hypothesis is that:dı.s; /for all2V.
The basis of the induction is the situation immediately after enqueuingsin line 9
of  BFS.   The inductive  hypothesis  holds  here,  becauses:dD0Dı.s; s/and
:dD1ı.s; /for all2V
f
s
g
.
For the inductive step,  consider a white vertexthat is discovered during the
search from a vertexu. The inductive hypothesis implies thatu:dı.s; u/.From
the assignment performed by line 15 and from Lemma 22.1, we obtain
:dDu:dC1
ı.s; u/C1
ı.s; / :
Vertexis then enqueued, and it is never enqueued again because it is also grayed
and thethenclause of lines 14–17 is executed only for white vertices.  Thus, the
value of:dnever changes again, and the inductive hypothesis is maintained.
To prove that:dDı.s; /, we must first show more precisely how the queueQ
operates during the course of BFS.  The next lemma shows that at all times, the
queue holds at most two distinctdvalues.

22.2Breadth-first search599
Lemma 22.3
Suppose that during the execution of BFS on a graphGD.V; E/, the queueQ
contains the verticesh
1
;
2
;:::;
r
i,where
1
is the head ofQand
r
is the tail.
Then,
r
:d
1
:dC1and
i
:d
iC1
:dforiD1;2;:::;r1.
ProofThe proof  is by induction  on the number of queue operations.   Initially,
when the queue contains onlys, the lemma certainly holds.
For the inductive step, we must prove that the lemma holds after both dequeuing
and enqueuing a vertex.  If the head
1
of the queue is dequeued,
2
becomes the
new head. (If the queue becomes empty, then the lemma holds vacuously.)  By the
inductive hypothesis,
1
:d
2
:d. But then we have
r
:d
1
:dC1
2
:dC1,
and the remaining inequalities are unaffected. Thus, the lemma follows with
2
as
the head.
In order to understand what happens upon enqueuing a vertex, we need to ex-
amine the code more closely.  When we enqueue a vertexin line 17 of BFS, it
becomes
rC1
.  At that time, we have already removed vertexu, whose adjacency
list is currently being scanned, from the queueQ, and by the inductive hypothesis,
the new head
1
has
1
:du:d. Thus,
rC1
:dD:dDu:dC1
1
:dC1.From
the inductive hypothesis, we also have
r
:du:dC1,andso
r
:du:dC1D
:dD
rC1
:d,  and the remaining  inequalities  are unaffected.   Thus,  the lemma
follows whenis enqueued.
The following  corollary  shows  that  thedvalues  at  the  time  that  vertices  are
enqueued are monotonically increasing over time.
Corollary 22.4
Suppose that vertices
i
and
j
are enqueued  during the execution  of  BFS, and
that
i
is enqueued before
j
.Then
i
:d
j
:dat the time that
j
is enqueued.
ProofImmediate from Lemma 22.3 and the property that each vertex receives a
finitedvalue at most once during the course of BFS.
We  can  now  prove  that  breadth-first  search  correctly  finds  shortest-path  dis-
tances.
Theorem 22.5 (Correctness of breadth-first search)
LetGD.V; E/be a directed or undirected graph, and suppose that BFS is run
onGfrom a given source vertexs2V. Then, during its execution, BFS discovers
every  vertex2Vthat  is  reachable  from  the  sources,  and  upon  termination,
:dDı.s; /for all2V.  Moreover,  for any vertex¤sthat is reachable

600Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
froms,  one  of  the  shortest  paths  fromstois  a  shortest  path  fromsto:
followed by the edge.: ; /.
ProofAssume, for the purpose of contradiction,  that some vertex receives ad
value  not  equal  to  its  shortest-path  distance.Letbe  the  vertex  with  min-
imumı.s; /that  receives  such  an  incorrectdvalue;   clearly¤s.By
Lemma 22.2,:dı.s; /, and thus we have that:d>ı.s;/. Vertexmust be
reachable froms, for if it is not, thenı.s; /D1:d.Letube the vertex im-
mediately precedingon a shortest path fromsto,sothatı.s; /Dı.s; u/C1.
Becauseı.s; u/ < ı.s; /, and because of how we chose,wehaveu:dDı.s; u/.
Putting these properties together, we have
:d>ı.s;/Dı.s; u/C1Du:dC1:(22.1)
Now  consider  the  time  when  BFS  chooses  to  dequeue  vertexufromQin
line  11.   At  this  time,  vertexis  either  white,  gray,  or  black.   We  shall  show
that in each of these cases, we derive a contradiction to inequality (22.1).  Ifis
white,  then line 15 sets:d
Du:dC1,  contradicting  inequality  (22.1).  Ifis
black, then it was already removed from the queue and, by Corollary 22.4, we have
:du:d, again contradicting inequality (22.1).  Ifis gray, then it was painted
gray upon dequeuing some vertexw, which was removed fromQearlier thanu
and for which:dDw:dC1. By Corollary 22.4, however,w:du:d,andsowe
have:dDw:dC1u:dC1, once again contradicting inequality (22.1).
Thus we conclude that:dDı.s; /for all2V.  All verticesreachable
fromsmust be discovered, for otherwise they would have1D:d>ı.s;/.To
conclude the proof of the theorem, observe that if:Du,then:dDu:dC1.
Thus, we can obtain a shortest path fromstoby taking a shortest path froms
to:and then traversing the edge.: ; /.
Breadth-first trees
The  procedure  BFS  builds  a  breadth-first  tree  as  it  searches  the  graph,  as  Fig-
ure 22.3 illustrates.  The tree corresponds to theattributes.  More formally, for
agraphGD.V; E/with sources,wedefinethepredecessor subgraphofGas
G

D.V

;E

/,where
V

D
f
2VW:¤NIL
g
[
f
s
g
and
E

D
f
.: ; /W2V


f
s
gg
:
The predecessor subgraphG

is abreadth-first treeifV

consists of the vertices
reachable fromsand, for all2V

, the subgraphG

contains a unique simple

22.2Breadth-first search601
path fromstothat is also a shortest path fromstoinG.  A breadth-first tree
is in fact a tree, since it is connected and
j
E

j
D
j
V

j
1(see Theorem B.2). We
call the edges inE

tree edges.
The following lemma shows that the predecessor subgraph produced by the BFS
procedure is a breadth-first tree.
Lemma 22.6
When applied to a directed or undirected graphGD.V; E/, procedure BFS con-
structsso that the predecessor subgraphG

D.V

;E

/is a breadth-first tree.
ProofLine 16 of BFS sets:Duif and only if.u; /2Eandı.s; / <1—
that is, ifis reachable froms—and thusV

consists of the vertices inVreachable
froms.SinceG

forms a tree, by Theorem B.2, it contains a unique simple path
fromsto each vertex inV

.  By applying Theorem 22.5 inductively, we conclude
that every such path is a shortest path inG.
The following procedure prints out the vertices on a shortest path fromsto,
assuming that BFS has already computed a breadth-first tree:
P
RINT-PAT H.G;s;/
1if
==s
2prints
3elseif:
==NIL
4print “no path from”s“to”“exists”
5elseP
RINT-PAT H.G;s;:/
6print
This procedure  runs in time linear in the number of vertices in the path printed,
since each recursive call is for a path one vertex shorter.
Exercises
22.2-1
Show thedandvalues that result from running breadth-first search on the di-
rected graph of Figure 22.2(a), using vertex3as the source.
22.2-2
Show thedandvalues that result from running breadth-first search on the undi-
rected graph of Figure 22.3, using vertexuas the source.

602Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
22.2-3
Show that using a single bit to store each vertex color suffices by arguing that the
BFS procedure would produce the same result if lines 5 and 14 were removed.
22.2-4
What is the running time of BFS if we represent its input graph by an adjacency
matrix and modify the algorithm to handle this form of input?
22.2-5
Argue that in a breadth-first search, the valueu:dassigned to a vertexuis inde-
pendent  of the order  in which the vertices appear  in each adjacency  list.   Using
Figure 22.3 as an example, show that the breadth-first tree computed by BFS can
depend on the ordering within adjacency lists.
22.2-6
Give an example of a directed graphGD.V; E/, a source vertexs2V,anda
set of tree edgesE

Esuch that for each vertex2V, the unique simple path
in the graph.V; E

/fromstois a shortest path inG, yet the set of edgesE

cannot be produced by running BFS onG, no matter how the vertices are ordered
in each adjacency list.
22.2-7
There  are  two  types  of  professional  wrestlers:   “babyfaces”  (“good  guys”)  and
“heels”  (“bad guys”).   Between any pair of professional  wrestlers,  there may or
may not be a rivalry.  Suppose we havenprofessional wrestlers and we have a list
ofrpairs of wrestlers for which there are rivalries.  Give anO.nCr/-time algo-
rithm that determines whether it is possible to designate some of the wrestlers as
babyfaces and the remainder as heels such that each rivalry is between a babyface
and a heel.  If it is possible to perform such a designation, your algorithm should
produce it.
22.2-8?
Thediameterof  a  treeTD.V; E/is  defined  as  max
u;2V
ı.u; /,thatis,the
largest  of  all  shortest-path  distances  in  the  tree.   Give  an  efficient  algorithm  to
compute the diameter of a tree, and analyze the running time of your algorithm.
22.2-9
LetGD.V; E/be a connected, undirected graph. Give anO.VCE/-time algo-
rithm to compute a path inGthat traverses each edge inEexactly once in each
direction.  Describe how you can find your way out of a maze if you are given a
large supply of pennies.

22.3Depth-first search603
22.3  Depth-first search
The  strategy  followed  by  depth-first  search  is,  as  its  name  implies,  to  search
“deeper”  in the graph  whenever  possible.   Depth-first  search  explores  edges out
of the most recently discovered vertexthat still has unexplored edges leaving it.
Once all of’s edges have been explored, the search “backtracks” to explore edges
leaving the vertex from whichwas discovered.  This process continues until we
have discovered all the vertices that are reachable from the original source vertex.
If any undiscovered vertices remain, then depth-first search selects one of them as
a new source, and it repeats the search from that source. The algorithm repeats this
entire process until it has discovered every vertex.
3
As in breadth-first search, whenever depth-first search discovers a vertexdur-
ing a scan of the adjacency list of an already discovered vertexu, it records this
event  by setting’s predecessor  attribute:tou.   Unlike  breadth-first  search,
whose predecessor subgraph forms a tree, the predecessor subgraph produced by
a  depth-first  search  may  be  composed  of  several  trees,  because  the  search  may
repeat from multiple sources.  Therefore, we define thepredecessor subgraphof
a depth-first search slightly differently from that of a breadth-first search:  we let
G

D.V; E

/,where
E

D
f
.: ; /W2Vand:¤NIL
g
:
The predecessor  subgraph of a depth-first search forms adepth-first forestcom-
prising severaldepth-first trees. The edges inE

aretree edges.
As in breadth-first search, depth-first search colors vertices during the search to
indicate their state.  Each vertex is initially white, is grayed when it isdiscovered
in the search, and is blackened when it isfinished, that is, when its adjacency list
has been examined completely. This technique guarantees that each vertex ends up
in exactly one depth-first tree, so that these trees are disjoint.
Besides creating a depth-first forest, depth-first search alsotimestampseach ver-
tex.  Each vertexhas two timestamps:  the first timestamp:drecords when
is first discovered (and grayed),  and the second timestamp:frecords when the
search finishes examining’s adjacency list (and blackens).  These timestamps
3
It may  seem  arbitrary that  breadth-first  search  is  limited to only  one  source  whereas  depth-first
search may search from multiple sources. Althoughconceptually, breadth-first search could proceed
from multiple sources and depth-first search could be limited to one source, our approach reflects how
the results of these searches are typically used.  Breadth-first search usually serves to find shortest-
path distances (and the associated predecessor subgraph) from a given source.  Depth-first search is
often a subroutine in another algorithm, as we shall see later in this chapter.

604Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
provide important information about the structure of the graph and are generally
helpful in reasoning about the behavior of depth-first search.
The procedure DFS below records when it discovers vertexuin the attributeu:d
and when it finishes vertexuin the attributeu:f.  These timestamps are integers
between1and2
j
V
j
, since there is one discovery event and one finishing event for
each of the
j
V
j
vertices. For every vertexu,
u:d<u:f:(22.2)
Vertexuis
WHITEbefore timeu:d,GRAYbetween timeu:dand timeu:f,and
BLACKthereafter.
The following pseudocode is the basic depth-first-search algorithm.  The input
graphGmay be undirected or directed.  The variabletimeis a global variable that
we use for timestamping.
DFS.G/
1foreach vertexu2G:V
2u:colorD
WHITE
3u: DNIL
4timeD0
5foreach vertexu2G:V
6ifu:color
==WHITE
7DFS-VISIT.G; u/
DFS-V
ISIT.G; u/
1timeDtimeC1//white vertexuhas just been discovered
2u:dDtime
3u:colorD
GRAY
4foreach2G:AdjŒu//explore edge.u; /
5if:color
==WHITE
6:Du
7DFS-V
ISIT.G; /
8u:colorD
BLACK//blackenu;itisfinished
9timeDtimeC1
10u:fDtime
Figure 22.4 illustrates the progress of DFS on the graph shown in Figure 22.2.
Procedure  DFS  works as follows.   Lines 1–3 paint  all vertices  white and ini-
tialize theirattributes to
NIL.  Line 4 resets the global time counter.  Lines 5–7
check each vertex inVin turn and,  when a white vertex is found,  visit it using
DFS-V
ISIT.  Every time DFS-VISIT.G; u/is called in line 7, vertexubecomes

22.3Depth-first search605
uvw
xyz
1/
1/2/1/2/
3/
1/2/
3/4/
1/2/
3/4/
B
1/2/
3/
B
4/5
1/2/
B
4/53/6
1/
B
4/53/6
2/7
1/
B
4/53/6
2/7
FB
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/8
B
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/89/
B
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/89/
C
B
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/89/
CB
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/89/
C
B
B
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/89/
C
B
10/11
B
4/53/6
2/7
F
1/8
C
B
10/11
9/12
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
uvw
xyz
(m)(n)(o)(p)
(i)(j)(k)(l)
(e)(f)(g)(h)
(a)(b)(c)(d)
10/10/
Figure 22.4The progress of the depth-first-search algorithm DFS on a directed graph.  As edges
are explored by the algorithm,  they are shown as either shaded (if they are tree edges) or dashed
(otherwise).   Nontree edges  are labeled B, C, orF according  to whether  they are back,  cross,  or
forward edges. Timestamps within vertices indicate discovery time/finishing times.
the root of a new tree in the depth-first forest.  When DFS returns, every vertexu
has been assigned adiscovery timeu:dand afinishing timeu:f.
In each call  DFS-V
ISIT.G; u/,  vertexuis initially  white.  Line 1 increments
the  global  variabletime,  line  2  records  the  new  value  oftimeas  the  discovery
timeu:d, and line 3 paintsugray.  Lines 4–7 examine each vertexadjacent tou
and recursively visitif it is white.  As each vertex2AdjŒuis considered in
line 4, we say that edge.u; /isexploredby the depth-first search.  Finally, after
every edge leavinguhas been explored, lines 8–10 paintublack, incrementtime,
and record the finishing time inu:f.
Note that the results of depth-first search may depend upon the order in which
line 5 of DFS examines the vertices and upon the order in which line 4 of DFS-
V
ISITvisits the neighbors of a vertex.  These different visitation orders tend not

606Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
to cause problems in practice, as we can usually useanydepth-first search result
effectively, with essentially equivalent results.
What is the running time of DFS? The loops on lines 1–3 and lines 5–7 of DFS
take time‚.V /, exclusive of the time to execute the calls to DFS-V
ISIT. Aswedid
for breadth-first search, we use aggregate analysis.  The procedure DFS-V
ISITis
called exactly once for each vertex2V, since the vertexuon which DFS-V
ISIT
is invoked must be white and the first thing DFS-VISITdoes is paint vertexugray.
During an execution of DFS-V
ISIT.G; /, the loop on lines 4–7 executes
j
AdjŒ
j
times. Since
X
2V
j
AdjŒ
j
D‚.E/ ;
the total cost of executing lines 4–7 of DFS-V
ISITis‚.E/.  The running time of
DFS is therefore‚.VCE/.
Properties of depth-first search
Depth-first search yields valuable information about the structure of a graph.  Per-
haps  the  most  basic  property  of  depth-first  search  is  that  the  predecessor  sub-
graphG

does  indeed  form  a  forest  of  trees,  since  the  structure  of  the  depth-
first trees exactly mirrors the structure of recursive calls of DFS-V
ISIT.Thatis,
uD:if and only if DFS-V
ISIT.G; /was called during a search ofu’s  ad-
jacency list.  Additionally,  vertexis a descendant  of vertexuin the depth-first
forest if and only ifis discovered during the time in whichuis gray.
Another important property of depth-first search is that discovery and finishing
times haveparenthesis structure.  If we represent the discovery of vertexuwith
a left parenthesis “.u” and represent its finishing by a right parenthesis “u/”, then
the  history  of discoveries  and finishings  makes a well-formed  expression  in the
sense that the parentheses are properly nested.  For example, the depth-first search
of Figure 22.5(a) corresponds to the parenthesization shown in Figure 22.5(b). The
following theorem provides another way to characterize the parenthesis structure.
Theorem 22.7 (Parenthesis theorem)
In any depth-first search of a (directed or undirected) graphGD.V; E/,forany
two verticesuand, exactly one of the following three conditions holds:

the intervalsŒu:d;u:fandŒ:d;:fare entirely disjoint, and neitherunor
is a descendant of the other in the depth-first forest,

the intervalŒu:d;u:fis contained entirely within the intervalŒ:d;:f,andu
is a descendant ofin a depth-first tree, or

the intervalŒ:d;:fis contained entirely within the intervalŒu:d;u:f,and
is a descendant ofuin a depth-first tree.

22.3Depth-first search607
3/62/91/1011/16
14/1512/137/84/5
yzs t
uvwx
B
C
F
C
C
C
B
12345678910111213141516
st
z
yw
x
vu
s
z
yw
x
t
vu
C
F
B
C
C
B
C
(a)
(b)
(c)
(s(z(y(xx)y)(ww)z)s)(t(vv)(uu)t)
Figure 22.5Properties of depth-first search.(a)The result of a depth-first search of a directed
graph.  Vertices are timestamped and edge types are indicated as in Figure 22.4.(b)Intervals for
the discovery time and finishing time of each vertex correspond to the parenthesization shown. Each
rectangle spans the interval given by the discovery and finishing times of the corresponding vertex.
Only tree edges are shown.   If two intervals overlap,  then one is nested within the other,  and the
vertex corresponding to the smaller interval is a descendant of the vertex corresponding to the larger.
(c)The graph of part (a) redrawn with all tree and forward edges going down within a depth-first tree
and all back edges going up from a descendant to an ancestor.

608Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
ProofWe begin with the case in whichu:d<:d.  We consider two subcases,
according to whether:d<u:for not. The first subcase occurs when:d<u:f,
sowas discovered whileuwas still gray, which implies thatis a descendant
ofu.   Moreover,  sincewas discovered  more recently  thanu,  all  of  its outgo-
ing  edges  are  explored,  andis  finished,  before  the  search  returns  to  and  fin-
ishesu.  In this case, therefore, the intervalŒ:d;:fis entirely contained within
the intervalŒu:d;u:f.  In the other subcase,u:f<:d, and by inequality (22.2),
u:d<u:f<:d<:f; thus the intervalsŒu:d;u:fandŒ:d;:fare disjoint.
Because the intervals  are disjoint,  neither vertex was discovered  while the other
was gray, and so neither vertex is a descendant of the other.
The case in which:d<u:dis similar, with the roles ofuandreversed in the
above argument.
Corollary 22.8 (Nesting of descendants’ intervals)
Vertexis a proper descendant of vertexuin the depth-first forest for a (directed
or undirected) graphGif and only ifu:d<:d<:f<u:f.
ProofImmediate from Theorem 22.7.
The next theorem gives another important characterization of when one vertex
is a descendant of another in the depth-first forest.
Theorem 22.9 (White-path theorem)
In a depth-first forest of a (directed or undirected) graphGD.V; E/, vertexis
a descendant of vertexuif and only if at the timeu:dthat the search discoversu,
there is a path fromutoconsisting entirely of white vertices.
Proof):IfDu, then the path fromutocontains just vertexu, which is still
white when we set the value ofu:d.  Now, suppose thatis a proper descendant
ofuin the depth-first forest.  By Corollary 22.8,u:d<:d,andsois white at
timeu:d.Sincecan be any descendant ofu, all vertices on the unique simple
path fromutoin the depth-first forest are white at timeu:d.
(: Suppose that there is a path of white vertices fromutoat timeu:d,but
does not become a descendant ofuin the depth-first tree. Without loss of general-
ity, assume that every vertex other thanalong the path becomes a descendant ofu.
(Otherwise, letbe the closest vertex toualong the path that doesn’t become a de-
scendant ofu.) Letwbe the predecessor ofin the path, so thatwis a descendant
of
u(wandumay in fact be the same vertex). By Corollary 22.8,w:fu:f.Be-
causemust be discovered afteruis discovered, but beforewis finished, we have
u:d<:d<w:fu:f.  Theorem 22.7 then implies that the intervalŒ:d;:f

22.3Depth-first search609
is contained entirely within the intervalŒu:d;u:f. By Corollary 22.8,must after
all be a descendant ofu.
Classification of edges
Another  interesting  property  of  depth-first  search  is that  the search  can  be used
to classify the edges of the input graphGD.V; E/.  The type of each edge can
provide important information about a graph. For example, in the next section, we
shall see that a directed graph is acyclic if and only if a depth-first search yields no
“back” edges (Lemma 22.11).
We can define four edge types in terms of the depth-first forestG

produced by
a depth-first search onG:
1.Tree edgesare edges in the depth-first forestG

. Edge.u; /is a tree edge if
was first discovered by exploring edge.u; /.
2.Back edgesare those edges.u; /connecting a vertexuto an ancestorin a
depth-first tree. We consider self-loops, which may occur in directed graphs, to
be back edges.
3.Forward edgesare those nontree edges.u; /connecting a vertexuto a de-
scendantin a depth-first tree.
4.Cross edgesare  all  other  edges.   They can  go  between  vertices  in  the  same
depth-first tree, as long as one vertex is not an ancestor of the other, or they can
go between vertices in different depth-first trees.
In Figures 22.4 and 22.5, edge labels indicate edge types. Figure 22.5(c) also shows
how to redraw the graph of Figure 22.5(a) so that all tree and forward edges head
downward in a depth-first tree and all back edges go up. We can redraw any graph
in this fashion.
The DFS algorithm has enough information to classify some edges as it encoun-
ters them.  The key idea is that when we first explore an edge.u; /,thecolorof
vertextells us something about the edge:
1.
WHITEindicates a tree edge,
2.
GRAYindicates a back edge, and
3.
BLACKindicates a forward or cross edge.
The first case is immediate from the specification of the algorithm.  For the sec-
ond case, observe that the gray vertices always form a linear chain of descendants
corresponding to the stack of active DFS-V
ISITinvocations;  the number of gray
vertices is one more than the depth in the depth-first forest of the vertex most re-
cently discovered.  Exploration always proceeds from the deepest gray vertex, so

610Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
an edge that reaches another gray vertex has reached an ancestor.  The third case
handles the remaining possibility;  Exercise 22.3-5 asks you to show that such an
edge.u; /is a forward edge ifu:d<:dand a cross edge ifu:d>:d.
An  undirected  graph  may  entail  some  ambiguity  in  how  we  classify  edges,
since.u; /and.; u/are really the same edge.  In such a case,  we classify the
edge as thefirsttype in the classification list that applies.  Equivalently (see Ex-
ercise 22.3-6), we classify the edge according to whichever of.u; /or.; u/the
search encounters first.
We now show that forward and cross edges never occur in a depth-first search of
an undirected graph.
Theorem 22.10
In a depth-first search of an undirected graphG, every edge ofGis either a tree
edge or a back edge.
ProofLet.u; /be an arbitrary edge ofG, and suppose without loss of generality
thatu:d<:d.  Then the search must discover and finishbefore it finishesu
(whileuis gray), sinceis onu’s adjacency list.  If the first time that the search
explores  edge.u; /,  it  is  in  the  direction  fromuto,thenis  undiscovered
(white)  until  that  time,  for  otherwise  the  search  would  have  explored  this  edge
already  in the  direction  fromtou.   Thus,.u; /becomes  a tree  edge.   If  the
search explores.u; /first in the direction fromtou,then.u; /is a back edge,
sinceuis still gray at the time the edge is first explored.
We shall see several applications of these theorems in the following sections.
Exercises
22.3-1
Make a3-by-3chart with row and column labels
WHITE,GRAY,andBLACK.In
each cell.i; j /, indicate whether, at any point during a depth-first search of a di-
rected graph, there can be an edge from a vertex of colorito a vertex of colorj.
For each possible edge, indicate what edge types it can be.  Make a second such
chart for depth-first search of an undirected graph.
22.3-2
Show how depth-first search works on the graph of Figure 22.6.  Assume that the
forloop of lines 5–7 of the DFS procedure considers the vertices in alphabetical
order,  and  assume  that  each  adjacency  list  is  ordered  alphabetically.   Show  the
discovery and finishing times for each vertex, and show the classification of each
edge.

22.3Depth-first search611
qr
stu
vwx y
z
Figure 22.6A directed graph for use in Exercises 22.3-2 and 22.5-2.
22.3-3
Show the parenthesis structure of the depth-first search of Figure 22.4.
22.3-4
Show  that  using  a  single  bit  to  store  each  vertex  color  suffices  by  arguing  that
the  DFS  procedure  would produce  the same result  if line 3 of  DFS-V
ISITwas
removed.
22.3-5
Show that edge.u; /is
a.a tree edge or forward edge if and only ifu:d<:d<:f<u:f,
b.a back edge if and only if:du:d<u:f:f,and
c.a cross edge if and only if:d<:f<u:d<u:f.
22.3-6
Show that in an undirected graph, classifying an edge.u; /as a tree edge or a back
edge according to whether.u; /or.; u/is encountered first during the depth-first
search is equivalent to classifying it according to the ordering of the four types in
the classification scheme.
22.3-7
Rewrite the procedure DFS, using a stack to eliminate recursion.
22.3-8
Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graphGcontains a path
fromuto,andifu:d<:din a depth-first search ofG,thenis a descendant
ofuin the depth-first forest produced.

612Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
22.3-9
Give a counterexample to the conjecture that if a directed graphGcontains a path
fromuto, then any depth-first search must result in:du:f.
22.3-10
Modify the pseudocode for depth-first search so that it prints out every edge in the
directed graphG, together with its type. Show what modifications, if any, you need
to make ifGis undirected.
22.3-11
Explain how a vertexuof a directed graph can end up in a depth-first tree contain-
ing onlyu, even thoughuhas both incoming and outgoing edges inG.
22.3-12
Show that we can use a depth-first search of an undirected graphGto identify the
connected components ofG, and that the depth-first forest contains as many trees
asGhas connected components.  More precisely, show how to modify depth-first
search so that it assigns to each vertexan integer label:ccbetween1andk,
wherekis the number of connected components ofG, such thatu:ccD:ccif
and only ifuandare in the same connected component.
22.3-13?
A directed graphGD.V; E/issingly connectedifuimplies thatGcontains
at most one simple path fromutofor all verticesu; 2V.  Give an efficient
algorithm to determine whether or not a directed graph is singly connected.
22.4  Topological sort
This section shows how we can use depth-first search to perform a topological sort
of a directed acyclic graph, or a “dag” as it is sometimes called. Atopological sort
of a dagGD.V; E/is a linear ordering of all its vertices such that ifGcontains an
edge.u; /,thenuappears beforein the ordering. (If the graph contains a cycle,
then no linear ordering is possible.)  We can view a topological sort of a graph as
an ordering of its vertices along a horizontal line so that all directed edges go from
left to right.  Topological sorting is thus different from the usual kind of “sorting”
studied in Part II.
Many applications  use directed acyclic graphs to indicate  precedences  among
events.  Figure 22.7 gives an example that arises when Professor  Bumstead gets
dressed  in the morning.   The professor  must don certain garments before others
(e.g., socks before shoes). Other items may be put on in any order (e.g., socks and

22.4Topological sort613
11/16
12/15
6/7
1/8
2/5
3/4
17/18
13/14
9/10
17/1811/1612/1513/149/101/86/72/53/4
(a)
(b)
undershorts
pants
belt
shirt
tie
jacket
socks
shoes
watch
socksundershortspantsshoeswatchshirtbelttiejacket
Figure 22.7  (a)Professor Bumstead topologically sorts his clothing when getting dressed.  Each
directed edge.u; /means  that garmentumust be put on before garment.   The discovery and
finishing times from a depth-first search are shown next to each vertex.(b)Thesamegraphshown
topologically sorted, with its vertices arranged from left to right in order of decreasing finishing time.
All directed edges go from left to right.
pants). A directed edge.u; /in the dag of Figure 22.7(a) indicates that garmentu
must be donned before garment. A topological sort of this dag therefore gives an
order for getting dressed.  Figure 22.7(b) shows the topologically sorted dag as an
ordering of vertices along a horizontal line such that all directed edges go from left
to right.
The following simple algorithm topologically sorts a dag:
T
OPOLOGICAL-SORT.G/
1    call DFS.G/to compute finishing times:ffor each vertex
2    as each vertex is finished, insert it onto the front of a linked list
3returnthe linked list of vertices
Figure 22.7(b) shows how the topologically sorted vertices appear in reverse order
of their finishing times.
We can perform a topological sort in time‚.VCE/, since depth-first search
takes‚.VCE/time and it takesO.1/time to insert each of the
j
V
j
vertices onto
the front of the linked list.
We prove the correctness of this algorithm using the following key lemma char-
acterizing directed acyclic graphs.

614Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
Lemma 22.11
A directed graphGis acyclic if and only if a depth-first search ofGyields no back
edges.
Proof):  Suppose that a depth-first search produces a back edge.u; /.Then
vertexis an ancestor of vertexuin the depth-first forest. Thus,Gcontains a path
fromtou, and the back edge.u; /completes a cycle.
(:  Suppose thatGcontains a cyclec.  We show that a depth-first search ofG
yields a back edge. Letbe the first vertex to be discovered inc,andlet.u; /be
the preceding edge inc. At time:d, the vertices ofcform a path of white vertices
fromtou. By the white-path theorem, vertexubecomes a descendant ofin the
depth-first forest. Therefore,.u; /is a back edge.
Theorem 22.12
T
OPOLOGICAL-SORTproduces  a  topological  sort  of  the  directed  acyclic  graph
provided as its input.
ProofSuppose that  DFS  is run on a given dagGD.V; E/to determine  fin-
ishing times for its vertices.  It suffices to show that for any pair of distinct ver-
ticesu; 2V,ifGcontains an edge fromuto,then:f<u:f.  Consider any
edge.u; /explored by DFS.G/.  When this edge is explored,cannot be gray,
since thenwould be an ancestor ofuand.u; /would be a back edge, contra-
dicting Lemma 22.11.  Therefore,must be either white or black.  Ifis white,
it becomes a descendant ofu,andso:f<u:f.Ifis black, it has already been
finished, so that:fhas already been set. Because we are still exploring fromu,we
have yet to assign a timestamp tou:f, and so once we do, we will have:f<u:f
as well.   Thus,  for any edge.u; /in the dag,  we have:f<u:f,  proving  the
theorem.
Exercises
22.4-1
Show the ordering of vertices produced by T
OPOLOGICAL-SORTwhen it is run on
the dag of Figure 22.8, under the assumption of Exercise 22.3-2.
22.4-2
Give  a  linear-time  algorithm  that  takes  as  input  a  directed  acyclic  graphGD
.V; E/and two verticessandt,  and returns the number of simple paths froms
totinG.  For example, the directed acyclic graph of Figure 22.8 contains exactly
four simple paths from vertexpto vertex:po,pory,posry,andpsry.
(Your algorithm needs only to count the simple paths, not list them.)

22.5Strongly connected components615
zyx
wvut
srq
ponm
Figure 22.8A dag for topological sorting.
22.4-3
Give an algorithm that determines whether or not a given undirected graphGD
.V; E/contains  a cycle.   Your algorithm  should run inO.V /time,  independent
of
j
E
j
.
22.4-4
Prove or  disprove:  If  a directed  graphGcontains  cycles,  then  T
OPOLOGICAL-
S
ORT.G/produces a vertex ordering that minimizes the number of “bad” edges
that are inconsistent with the ordering produced.
22.4-5
Another  way  to  perform  topological  sorting  on  a  directed  acyclic  graphGD
.V; E/is to repeatedly find a vertex of in-degree0, output it, and remove it and
all of its outgoing edges from the graph.  Explain how to implement this idea so
that it runs in timeO.VCE/. What happens to this algorithm ifGhas cycles?
22.5  Strongly connected components
We now  consider  a classic  application  of  depth-first  search:  decomposing  a  di-
rected graph into its strongly connected components. This section shows how to do
so using two depth-first searches. Many algorithms that work with directed graphs
begin with such a decomposition.  After decomposing the graph into strongly con-
nected components, such algorithms run separately on each one and then combine
the solutions according to the structure of connections among components.
Recall  from  Appendix  B  that  a  strongly  connected  component  of  a  directed
graphGD.V; E/is a maximal set of verticesCVsuch that for every pair
of verticesuandinC, we have bothuandu; that is, verticesuand
are reachable from each other. Figure 22.9 shows an example.

616Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
13/1411/16
12/153/4
1/10
2/7
8/9
5/6
abcd
efgh
abcd
efgh
abe
cd
fgh
(c)
(b)
(a)
Figure 22.9  (a)A directed graphG. Each shaded region is a strongly connected component ofG.
Each vertex is labeled with its discovery and finishing times in a depth-first search, and tree edges
are shaded.(b)The graphG
T
, the transpose ofG, with the depth-first forest computed in line 3
of S
TRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTSshown and tree edges shaded. Each strongly connected
component corresponds to one depth-first tree. Verticesb,c,g,andh, which are heavily shaded, are
the roots of the depth-first trees produced by the depth-first search ofG
T
.(c)The acyclic component
graphG
SCC
obtained by contracting all edges within each strongly connected component ofGso
that only a single vertex remains in each component.
Our  algorithm  for  finding  strongly  connected  components  of  a  graphGD
.V; E/uses  the  transpose  ofG,  which  we defined  in  Exercise  22.1-3  to  be  the
graphG
T
D.V; E
T
/,whereE
T
D
f
.u; /W.; u/2E
g
.Thatis,E
T
consists of
the edges ofGwith their directions reversed.  Given an adjacency-list representa-
tion ofG, the time to createG
T
isO.VCE/.  It is interesting to observe thatG
andG
T
have exactly the same strongly connected components:uandare reach-
able from each other inGif and only if they are reachable from each other inG
T
.
Figure 22.9(b) shows the transpose of the graph in Figure 22.9(a), with the strongly
connected components shaded.

22.5Strongly connected components617
The following linear-time (i.e.,‚.VCE/-time) algorithm computes the strongly
connected  components  of  a  directed  graphGD.V; E/using  two  depth-first
searches, one onGand one onG
T
.
S
TRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS.G/
1    call DFS.G/to compute finishing timesu:ffor each vertexu
2computeG
T
3    call DFS.G
T
/, but in the main loop of DFS, consider the vertices
in order of decreasingu:f(as computed in line 1)
4    output the vertices of each tree in the depth-first forest formed in line 3 as a
separate strongly connected component
The idea behind this algorithm  comes from a key property  of thecomponent
graphG
SCC
D.V
SCC
;E
SCC
/,  which  we  define  as  follows.    Suppose  thatG
has  strongly  connected  componentsC
1
;C
2
;:::;C
k
.The  vertex  setV
SCC
is
f

1
;
2
;:::;
k
g
,  and it contains  a vertex
i
for  each strongly  connected  compo-
nentC
i
ofG. There is an edge.
i
;
j
/2E
SCC
ifGcontains a directed edge.x; y/
for somex2C
i
and somey2C
j
.  Looked at another way,  by contracting  all
edges whose incident vertices are within the same strongly connected component
ofG, the resulting graph isG
SCC
.  Figure 22.9(c) shows the component graph of
the graph in Figure 22.9(a).
The  key  property  is  that  the  component  graph  is  a  dag,  which  the  following
lemma implies.
Lemma 22.13
LetCandC
0
be distinct strongly connected components in directed graphGD
.V; E/,letu; 2C,letu
0
;
0
2C
0
, and suppose thatGcontains a pathuu
0
.
ThenGcannot also contain a path
0
.
ProofIfGcontains  a path
0
,  then it contains  pathsuu
0

0
and

0
u.  Thus,uand
0
are reachable from each other, thereby contradicting
the assumption thatCandC
0
are distinct strongly connected components.
We shall see that by considering vertices in the second depth-first search in de-
creasing  order  of  the  finishing  times  that  were  computed  in  the  first  depth-first
search, we are, in essence,  visiting the vertices of the component graph (each of
which corresponds to a strongly connected component ofG) in topologically sorted
order.
Because the S
TRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTSprocedure performs two
depth-first  searches,  there  is  the  potential  for  ambiguity  when  we  discussu:d
oru:f.   In this  section,  these values  always  refer  to the discovery  and finishing
times as computed by the first call of DFS, in line 1.

618Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
We  extend  the  notation  for  discovery  and  finishing  times  to  sets  of  vertices.
IfUV, then we defined.U /Dmin
u2U
f
u:d
g
andf.U/Dmax
u2U
f
u:f
g
.
That is,d.U /andf.U/are the earliest discovery time and latest finishing time,
respectively, of any vertex inU.
The following lemma and its corollary give a key property relating strongly con-
nected components and finishing times in the first depth-first search.
Lemma 22.14
LetCandC
0
be distinct strongly connected components in directed graphGD
.V; E/. Suppose that there is an edge.u; /2E,whereu2Cand2C
0
.Then
f.C/ > f.C
0
/.
ProofWe consider two cases, depending on which strongly connected compo-
nent,CorC
0
, had the first discovered vertex during the depth-first search.
Ifd.C / < d.C
0
/,letxbe the first vertex discovered inC. At timex:d,allver-
tices inCandC
0
are white. At that time,Gcontains a path fromxto each vertex
inCconsisting only of white vertices. Because.u; /2E, for any vertexw2C
0
,
there is also a path inGat timex:dfromxtowconsisting only of white vertices:
xu!w.  By the white-path theorem, all vertices inCandC
0
become
descendants ofxin the depth-first tree. By Corollary 22.8,xhas the latest finishing
time of any of its descendants, and sox:fDf.C/ > f.C
0
/.
If instead we haved.C / > d.C
0
/,letybe the first vertex discovered  inC
0
.
At timey:d,  all vertices inC
0
are white andGcontains  a path fromyto each
vertex inC
0
consisting only of white vertices.  By the white-path theorem, all ver-
tices inC
0
become descendants ofyin the depth-first tree, and by Corollary 22.8,
y:fDf.C
0
/. At timey:d, all vertices inCare white. Since there is an edge.u; /
fromCtoC
0
,  Lemma 22.13 implies that  there cannot  be a path fromC
0
toC.
Hence, no vertex inCis reachable fromy. At timey:f, therefore, all vertices inC
are still white.  Thus, for any vertexw2C,wehavew:f>y:f, which implies
thatf.C/ > f.C
0
/.
The following corollary tells us that each edge inG
T
that goes between different
strongly connected components goes from a component with an earlier finishing
time (in the first depth-first search) to a component with a later finishing time.
Corollary 22.15
LetCandC
0
be distinct strongly connected components in directed graphGD
.V; E/. Suppose that there is an edge.u; /2E
T
,whereu2Cand2C
0
.Then
f.C/ < f.C
0
/.

22.5Strongly connected components619
ProofSince.u; /2E
T
,wehave.; u/2E.   Because  the  strongly  con-
nected  components  ofGandG
T
are  the  same,  Lemma  22.14  implies  that
f.C/ < f.C
0
/.
Corollary 22.15 provides the key to understanding why the strongly connected
components algorithm works. Let us examine what happens when we perform the
second depth-first search,  which is onG
T
.  We start with the strongly connected
componentCwhose  finishing  timef.C/is maximum.   The search  starts  from
some vertexx2C, and it visits all vertices inC. By Corollary 22.15,G
T
contains
no edges fromCto any other strongly connected component,  and so the search
fromxwill not visit vertices in any other component.  Thus, the tree rooted atx
contains exactly the vertices ofC.  Having completed visiting all vertices inC,
the search in line 3 selects as a root a vertex from some other strongly connected
componentC
0
whose finishing timef.C
0
/is maximum over all components other
thanC.   Again,  the  search  will visit  all  vertices  inC
0
,  but  by  Corollary  22.15,
the only edges inG
T
fromC
0
to any other component  must be toC,whichwe
have already visited.  In general, when the depth-first search ofG
T
in line 3 visits
any strongly connected component,  any edges out of that component must be to
components that the search already visited. Each depth-first tree, therefore, will be
exactly one strongly connected component. The following theorem formalizes this
argument.
Theorem 22.16
The  S
TRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTSprocedure  correctly  computes  the
strongly connected components of the directed graphGprovided as its input.
ProofWe  argue  by  induction  on  the  number  of  depth-first  trees  found  in  the
depth-first  search  ofG
T
in  line  3  that  the  vertices  of  each  tree  form  a  strongly
connected component.  The inductive hypothesis is that the firstktrees produced
in line 3 are strongly connected  components.  The basis for the induction,  when
kD0, is trivial.
In the inductive step, we assume that each of the firstkdepth-first trees produced
in line 3 is a strongly connected component,  and we consider the.kC1/st tree
produced.  Let the root of this tree be vertexu,andletube in strongly connected
componentC. Because of how we choose roots in the depth-first search in line 3,
u:fDf.C/ > f.C
0
/for any strongly  connected  componentC
0
other  thanC
that has yet to be visited.  By the inductive hypothesis, at the time that the search
visitsu, all other vertices ofCare white. By the white-path theorem, therefore, all
other vertices ofCare descendants ofuin its depth-first tree.  Moreover, by the
inductive hypothesis and by Corollary 22.15, any edges inG
T
that leaveCmust be
to strongly connected components that have already been visited.  Thus, no vertex

620Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
in any strongly connected component other thanCwill be a descendant ofuduring
the depth-first search ofG
T
.  Thus, the vertices of the depth-first tree inG
T
that is
rooted atuform exactly one strongly connected component, which completes the
inductive step and the proof.
Here is another way to look at how the second depth-first search operates. Con-
sider  the  component  graph.G
T
/
SCC
ofG
T
.   If  we map each strongly  connected
component visited in the second depth-first search to a vertex of.G
T
/
SCC
, the sec-
ond depth-first search visits vertices of.G
T
/
SCC
in the reverse of a topologically
sorted  order.   If  we reverse the edges  of.G
T
/
SCC
,  we get  the graph..G
T
/
SCC
/
T
.
Because..G
T
/
SCC
/
T
DG
SCC
(see Exercise 22.5-4), the second depth-first search
visits the vertices ofG
SCC
in topologically sorted order.
Exercises
22.5-1
How can the number of strongly connected components of a graph change if a new
edge is added?
22.5-2
Show how the procedure  S
TRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTSworks on the
graph of Figure 22.6. Specifically, show the finishing times computed in line 1 and
the forest produced in line 3. Assume that the loop of lines 5–7 of DFS considers
vertices in alphabetical order and that the adjacency lists are in alphabetical order.
22.5-3
Professor  Bacon  claims  that  the  algorithm  for  strongly  connected  components
would  be  simpler  if  it  used  the  original  (instead  of  the  transpose)  graph  in  the
second depth-first search and scanned the vertices in order ofincreasingfinishing
times. Does this simpler algorithm always produce correct results?
22.5-4
Prove that for any directed graphG,wehave..G
T
/
SCC
/
T
DG
SCC
.Thatis,the
transpose of the component graph ofG
T
is the same as the component graph ofG.
22.5-5
Give anO.VCE/-time algorithm to compute the component graph of a directed
graphGD.V; E/. Make sure that there is at most one edge between two vertices
in the component graph your algorithm produces.

Problems for Chapter 22621
22.5-6
Given a directed graphGD.V; E/, explain how to create another graphG
0
D
.V; E
0
/such that (a)G
0
has the same strongly connected components asG,(b)G
0
has the same component graph asG,and(c)E
0
is as small as possible. Describe a
fast algorithm to computeG
0
.
22.5-7
A directed graphGD.V; E/issemiconnectedif, for all pairs of verticesu; 2V,
we haveuoru.   Give  an  efficient  algorithm  to  determine  whether
or notGis semiconnected.  Prove that your algorithm is correct, and analyze its
running time.
Problems
22-1  Classifying edges by breadth-first search
A depth-first  forest  classifies  the edges  of a graph  into tree,  back,  forward,  and
cross edges.  A breadth-first tree can also be used to classify the edges reachable
from the source of the search into the same four categories.
a.Prove that in a breadth-first search of an undirected graph, the following prop-
erties hold:
1. There are no back edges and no forward edges.
2. For each tree edge.u; /,wehave:dDu:dC1.
3. For each cross edge.u; /,wehave:dDu:dor:dDu:dC1.
b.Prove that in a breadth-first search of a directed graph, the following properties
hold:
1. There are no forward edges.
2. For each tree edge.u; /,wehave:dDu:dC1.
3. For each cross edge.u; /,wehave:du:dC1.
4. For each back edge.u; /,wehave0:du:d.
22-2  Articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components
LetGD.V; E/be a connected, undirected graph.  Anarticulation pointofGis
a vertex whose removal disconnectsG.AbridgeofGis an edge whose removal
disconnectsG.Abiconnected componentofGis a maximal set of edges such
that any two edges in the set lie on a common simple cycle. Figure 22.10 illustrates

622Chapter 22Elementary Graph Algorithms
1
2
3
4
5
6
Figure 22.10The articulation points, bridges, and biconnected components of a connected, undi-
rected graph for use in Problem 22-2.  The articulation points are the heavily shaded vertices, the
bridges are the heavily shaded edges, and the biconnected components are the edges in the shaded
regions, with abccnumbering shown.
these definitions.  We can determine articulation points, bridges, and biconnected
components using depth-first search. LetG

D.V; E

/be a depth-first tree ofG.
a.Prove that the root ofG

is an articulation point ofGif and only if it has at
least two children inG

.
b.Letbe a nonroot vertex ofG

. Prove thatis an articulation point ofGif and
only ifhasachildssuch that there is no back edge fromsor any descendant
ofsto a proper ancestor of.
c.Let
:lowDmin
(
:d;
w:dW.u; w/is a back edge for some descendantuof:
Show how to compute:lowfor all vertices2VinO.E/time.
d.Show how to compute all articulation points inO.E/time.
e.Prove that an edge ofGis a bridge if and only if it does not lie on any simple
cycle ofG.
f.Show how to compute all the bridges ofGinO.E/time.
g.Prove that the biconnected components ofGpartition the nonbridge edges ofG.
h.Give anO.E/-time  algorithm  to label  each  edgeeofGwith  a positive  in-
tegere:bccsuch thate:bccDe
0
:bccif and only ifeande
0
are in the same
biconnected component.

Notes for Chapter 22623
22-3  Euler tour
AnEuler tourof a strongly connected, directed graphGD.V; E/is a cycle that
traverses each edge ofGexactly once,  although it may visit a vertex more than
once.
a.Show thatGhas an Euler tour if and only if in-degree./Dout-degree./for
each vertex2V.
b.Describe anO.E/-time algorithm to find an Euler tour ofGif one exists. (Hint:
Merge edge-disjoint cycles.)
22-4  Reachability
LetGD.V; E/be a directed graph in which each vertexu2Vis labeled with
a unique  integerL.u/from the set
f
1;2;:::;
j
V
jg
.   For each vertexu2V,let
R.u/D
f
2VWu
g
be the set of vertices that are reachable fromu.Define
min.u/to be the vertex inR.u/whose label is minimum, i.e., min.u/is the vertex
such thatL./Dmin
f
L.w/Ww2R.u/
g
.GiveanO.VCE/-time algorithm that
computes min.u/for all verticesu2V
.
Chapter notes
Even [103] and Tarjan [330] are excellent references for graph algorithms.
Breadth-first  search  was discovered  by Moore [260] in the context  of  finding
paths through mazes.  Lee [226] independently discovered the same algorithm in
the context of routing wires on circuit boards.
Hopcroft and Tarjan [178] advocated the use of the adjacency-list representation
over  the adjacency-matrix  representation  for  sparse  graphs  and were the  first  to
recognize the algorithmic importance of depth-first search.  Depth-first search has
been widely used since the late 1950s, especially in artificial intelligence programs.
Tarjan [327] gave a linear-time algorithm for finding strongly connected compo-
nents. The algorithm for strongly connected components in Section 22.5 is adapted
from Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [6], who credit it to S. R. Kosaraju (unpublished)
and M. Sharir [314].  Gabow [119] also developed an algorithm for strongly con-
nected components that is based on contracting cycles and uses two stacks to make
it run in linear time.  Knuth [209] was the first to give a linear-time algorithm for
topological sorting.

23Minimum Spanning Trees
Electronic circuit designs often need to make the pins of several components elec-
trically equivalent by wiring them together. To interconnect a set ofnpins, we can
use an arrangement ofn1wires, each connecting two pins. Of all such arrange-
ments, the one that uses the least amount of wire is usually the most desirable.
We can  model  this  wiring  problem  with a connected,  undirected  graphGD
.V; E/,whereVis the set of pins,Eis the set of possible interconnections between
pairs of pins, and for each edge.u; /2E,wehaveaweightw.u; /specifying
the cost  (amount  of wire needed)  to connectuand. Wethenwishtofindan
acyclic subsetTEthat connects all of the vertices and whose total weight
w.T /D
X
.u;/2T
w.u; /
is minimized. SinceTis acyclic and connects all of the vertices, it must form a tree,
which we call aspanning treesince it “spans” the graphG. We call the problem of
determining the treeTtheminimum-spanning-tree problem.
1
Figure 23.1 shows
an example of a connected graph and a minimum spanning tree.
In  this  chapter,  we  shall  examine  two  algorithms  for  solving  the  minimum-
spanning-tree problem:  Kruskal’s algorithm and Prim’s algorithm.  We can easily
make each of them run in timeO.ElgV/using ordinary binary heaps.  By using
Fibonacci heaps, Prim’s algorithm runs in timeO.ECVlgV/, which improves
over the binary-heap implementation if
j
V
j
is much smaller than
j
E
j
.
The two algorithms  are greedy algorithms,  as described  in Chapter  16.   Each
step of a greedy algorithm must make one of several possible choices. The greedy
strategy advocates making the choice that is the best at the moment.  Such a strat-
egy does not generally guarantee that it will always find globally optimal solutions
1
The phrase “minimum spanning tree” is a shortened form of the phrase “minimum-weight spanning
tree.”  We are not, for example, minimizing the number of edges inT, since all spanning trees have
exactly
j
V
j
1edges by Theorem B.2.

23.1Growing a minimum spanning tree625
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
2
76
Figure 23.1A minimum spanning tree for a connected graph.  The weights on edges are shown,
and the edges in a minimum spanning tree are shaded. The total weight of the tree shown is37.This
minimum spanning tree is not unique: removing the edge.b; c/and replacing it with the edge.a; h/
yields another spanning tree with weight37.
to problems. For the minimum-spanning-tree problem, however, we can prove that
certain greedy strategies do yield a spanning tree with minimum weight. Although
you can read this chapter independently  of Chapter 16, the greedy methods pre-
sented here are a classic application of the theoretical notions introduced there.
Section 23.1 introduces a “generic” minimum-spanning-tree method that grows
a spanning tree by adding one edge at a time.  Section 23.2 gives two algorithms
that implement the generic method.  The first algorithm, due to Kruskal, is similar
to the  connected-components  algorithm  from  Section  21.1.   The second,  due  to
Prim, resembles Dijkstra’s shortest-paths algorithm (Section 24.3).
Because a tree is a type of graph, in order to be precise we must define a tree in
terms of not just its edges, but its vertices as well.  Although this chapter focuses
on trees in terms of their edges, we shall operate with the understanding that the
vertices of a treeTare those that some edge ofTis incident on.
23.1  Growing a minimum spanning tree
Assume that we have a connected,  undirected  graphGD.V; E/with a weight
functionwWE!R, and we wish to find a minimum spanning tree forG.The
two algorithms we consider in this chapter use a greedy approach to the problem,
although they differ in how they apply this approach.
This greedy strategy is captured by the following generic method, which grows
the minimum spanning tree one edge at a time. The generic method manages a set
of edgesA, maintaining the following loop invariant:
Prior to each iteration,Ais a subset of some minimum spanning tree.
At each step, we determine an edge.u; /that we can add toAwithout violating
this invariant, in the sense thatA[
f
.u; /
g
is also a subset of a minimum spanning

626Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
tree. We call such an edge asafe edgeforA, since we can add it safely toAwhile
maintaining the invariant.
G
ENERIC-MST.G; w/
1AD;
2whileAdoes not form a spanning tree
3find an edge.u; /that is safe forA
4ADA[
f
.u; /
g
5returnA
We use the loop invariant as follows:
Initialization:After line 1, the setAtrivially satisfies the loop invariant.
Maintenance:The loop in lines 2–4 maintains the invariant by adding only safe
edges.
Termination:All edges added toAare in a minimum spanning tree, and so the
setAreturned in line 5 must be a minimum spanning tree.
The tricky part is, of course, finding a safe edge in line 3. One must exist, since
when line 3 is executed, the invariant dictates that there is a spanning treeTsuch
thatAT.  Within thewhileloop body,Amust be a proper subset ofT,and
therefore there must be an edge.u; /2Tsuch that.u; /62Aand.u; /is safe
forA.
In the remainder of this section, we provide a rule (Theorem 23.1) for recogniz-
ing safe edges. The next section describes two algorithms that use this rule to find
safe edges efficiently.
We first need some definitions.  Acut.S; VS/of an undirected graphGD
.V; E/is a partition ofV.  Figure 23.2 illustrates this notion.  We say that an edge
.u; /2Ecrossesthe cut.S; VS/if one of its endpoints is inSand the other
is inVS. We say that a cutrespectsa setA
of edges if no edge inAcrosses the
cut. An edge is alight edgecrossing a cut if its weight is the minimum of any edge
crossing the cut. Note that there can be more than one light edge crossing a cut in
the case of ties.  More generally,  we say that an edge is alight edgesatisfying a
given property if its weight is the minimum of any edge satisfying the property.
Our rule for recognizing safe edges is given by the following theorem.
Theorem 23.1
LetGD.V; E/be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight func-
tionwdefined onE.LetAbe a subset ofEthat is included in some minimum
spanning tree forG,let.S; VS/be any cut ofGthat respectsA,andlet.u; /
be a light edge crossing.S; VS/. Then, edge.u; /is safe forA.

23.1Growing a minimum spanning tree627
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
14
4
21
2
76
a
b
d
e
h
i
g
c
f
8
11
8
7
14
10
4
6
7
4
9
2
1
2
S
(a)(b)
V – S
S
V – S
S
V – S
Figure 23.2Two ways  of  viewing a  cut.S; VS/of  the  graph  from  Figure  23.1.(a)Black
vertices are in the setS,  and white vertices are inVS.   The edges  crossing the cut are  those
connecting white vertices with black vertices.  The edge.d; c/is the unique light edge crossing the
cut.  A subsetAof the edges is shaded; note that the cut.S; VS/respectsA, since no edge ofA
crosses the cut.(b)The same graph with the vertices in the setSon the left and the vertices in the
setVSon the right. An edge crosses the cut if it connects a vertex on the left with a vertex on the
right.
ProofLetTbe a minimum spanning  tree that includesA,  and assume thatT
does  not  contain  the  light  edge.u; /,  since  if  it  does,  we  are  done.   We  shall
construct another minimum spanning treeT
0
that includesA[
f
.u; /
g
by using a
cut-and-paste technique, thereby showing that.u; /is a safe edge forA.
The  edge.u; /forms  a  cycle  with  the  edges  on  the  simple  pathpfromu
toinT, as Figure 23.3 illustrates.  Sinceuandare on opposite sides of the
cut.S; VS/, at least one edge inTlies on the simple pathpand also crosses
the cut.  Let.x; y/be any such edge.  The edge.x; y/is not inA, because the cut
respectsA.Since.x; y/is on the unique simple path fromutoinT,remov-
ing.x; y/breaksTinto two components.  Adding.u; /reconnects them to form
a new spanning treeT
0
DT
f
.x; y/
g
[
f
.u; /
g
.
We next show thatT
0
is a minimum spanning tree.  Since.u; /is a light edge
crossing.S; VS/and.x; y/also crosses this cut,w.u; /w.x; y/. Therefore,
w.T
0
/Dw.T /w.x; y/Cw.u; /
w.T / :

628Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
y
v
u
x
p
Figure 23.3The proof of Theorem 23.1. Black vertices are inS, and white vertices are inVS.
The edges in the minimum spanning treeTare shown, but the edges in the graphGare not.  The
edges inAare shaded, and.u; /is a light edge crossing the cut.S; VS/.  The edge.x; y/is
an edge on the unique simple pathpfromutoinT.  To form a minimum spanning treeT
0
that
contains.u; /, remove the edge.x; y/fromTand add the edge.u; /.
ButTis a minimum spanning tree,  so thatw.T /w.T
0
/;  thus,T
0
must be a
minimum spanning tree also.
It remains to show that.u; /is actually a safe edge forA.WehaveAT
0
,
sinceATand.x; y/62A; thus,A[
f
.u; /
g
T
0
. Consequently, sinceT
0
is a
minimum spanning tree,.u; /is safe forA.
Theorem 23.1 gives us a better understanding of the workings of the GENERIC-
MST  method on a connected  graphGD.V; E/.  As the method proceeds,  the
setAis always acyclic;  otherwise, a minimum spanning tree includingAwould
contain a cycle, which is a contradiction.  At any point in the execution, the graph
G
A
D.V; A/is a forest, and each of the connected components ofG
A
is a tree.
(Some of the trees may contain just one vertex, as is the case, for example, when
the  method  begins:Ais  empty  and  the  forest  contains
j
V
j
trees,  one  for  each
vertex.) Moreover, any safe edge.u; /forAconnects distinct components ofG
A
,
sinceA[
f
.u; /
g
must be acyclic.
Thewhileloop in lines 2–4 of G
ENERIC-MST executes
j
V
j
1times because
it finds one of the
j
V
j
1edges of a minimum spanning  tree in each iteration.
Initially,  whenAD;,thereare
j
V
j
trees inG
A
, and each iteration reduces that
number by1. When the forest contains only a single tree, the method terminates.
The two algorithms in Section 23.2 use the following corollary to Theorem 23.1.

23.1Growing a minimum spanning tree629
Corollary 23.2
LetGD.V; E/be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight func-
tionwdefined onE.LetAbe a subset ofEthat is included in some minimum
spanning tree forG,andletCD.V
C
;E
C
/be a connected component (tree) in the
forestG
A
D.V; A/.If.u; /is a light edge connectingCto some other component
inG
A
,then.u; /is safe forA.
ProofThe cut.V
C
;VV
C
/respectsA,and.u; /is a light edge for this cut.
Therefore,.u; /is safe forA.
Exercises
23.1-1
Let.u; /be a minimum-weight edge in a connected graphG.  Show that.u; /
belongs to some minimum spanning tree ofG.
23.1-2
Professor Sabatier conjectures the following converse of Theorem 23.1.  LetGD
.V; E/be a connected, undirected graph with a real-valued weight functionwde-
fined onE.LetAbe a subset ofEthat is included in some minimum spanning
tree forG,let.S; VS/be any cut ofGthat respectsA,andlet.u; /be a safe
edge forAcrossing.S; VS/. Then,.u; /is a light edge for the cut. Show that
the professor’s conjecture is incorrect by giving a counterexample.
23.1-3
Show that if an edge.u; /is contained in some minimum spanning tree, then it is
a light edge crossing some cut of the graph.
23.1-4
Give a simple example of a connected graph such that the set of edgesf.u; /W
there exists a cut.S; VS/such that.u; /is a light edge crossing.S; VS/g
does not form a minimum spanning tree.
23.1-5
Letebe a maximum-weight edge on some cycle of connected graphGD.V; E/.
Prove that there is a minimum spanning tree ofG
0
D.V; E
f
e
g
/that is also a
minimum spanning tree ofG. That is, there is a minimum spanning tree ofGthat
does not includee.

630Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
23.1-6
Show that  a graph  has a unique  minimum spanning  tree if,  for  every cut  of the
graph, there is a unique light edge crossing the cut.  Show that the converse is not
true by giving a counterexample.
23.1-7
Argue that if all edge weights of a graph are positive, then any subset of edges that
connects all vertices and has minimum total weight must be a tree. Give an example
to show that the same conclusion does not follow if we allow some weights to be
nonpositive.
23.1-8
LetTbe a minimum spanning tree of a graphG,andletLbe the sorted list of the
edge weights ofT.  Show that for any other minimum spanning treeT
0
ofG,the
listLis also the sorted list of edge weights ofT
0
.
23.1-9
LetTbe a minimum spanning tree of a graphGD.V; E/,andletV
0
beasubset
ofV.LetT
0
be the subgraph ofTinduced byV
0
,andletG
0
be the subgraph ofG
induced byV
0
.  Show that ifT
0
is connected, thenT
0
is a minimum spanning tree
ofG
0
.
23.1-10
Given a graphGand a minimum spanning treeT, suppose that we decrease the
weight of one of the edges inT.  Show thatTis still a minimum spanning tree
forG. More formally, letTbe a minimum spanning tree forGwith edge weights
given by weight functionw. Choose one edge.x; y/2Tand a positive numberk,
and define the weight functionw
0
by
w
0
.u; /D
(
w.u; /if.u; /¤.x; y/ ;
w.x; y/kif.u; /D.x; y/ :
Show thatTis a minimum spanning tree forGwith edge weights given byw
0
.
23.1-11?
Given a graphGand a minimum spanning treeT, suppose that we decrease the
weight of one of the edges not inT.  Give an algorithm for finding the minimum
spanning tree in the modified graph.

23.2The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim631
23.2  The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim
The two minimum-spanning-tree algorithms described in this section elaborate on
the generic method. They each use a specific rule to determine a safe edge in line 3
of G
ENERIC-MST. In Kruskal’s algorithm, the setAis a forest whose vertices are
all those of the given graph.  The safe edge added toAis always a least-weight
edge in the graph that connects two distinct components.  In Prim’s algorithm, the
setAforms a single tree.  The safe edge added toAis always a least-weight edge
connecting the tree to a vertex not in the tree.
Kruskal’s algorithm
Kruskal’s algorithm finds a safe edge to add to the growing forest by finding, of all
the edges that connect any two trees in the forest, an edge.u; /of least weight.
LetC
1
andC
2
denote the two trees that are connected by.u; /.Since.u; /must
be a light edge connectingC
1
to some other tree, Corollary 23.2 implies that.u; /
isasafeedgeforC
1
. Kruskal’s algorithm qualifies as a greedy algorithm because
at each step it adds to the forest an edge of least possible weight.
Our  implementation  of  Kruskal’s  algorithm  is  like  the  algorithm  to  compute
connected components from Section 21.1.  It uses a disjoint-set  data structure to
maintain several disjoint sets of elements. Each set contains the vertices in one tree
of the current forest. The operation F
IND-SET.u/returns a representative element
from the set that containsu. Thus, we can determine whether two verticesuand
belong to the same tree by testing whether F
IND-SET.u/equals FIND-SET./.To
combine trees, Kruskal’s algorithm calls the U
NIONprocedure.
MST-K
RUSKAL.G; w/
1AD;
2foreach vertex2G:V
3M
AKE-SET./
4sort the edges ofG:Einto nondecreasing order by weightw
5foreach edge.u; /2G:E, taken in nondecreasing order by weight
6ifF
IND-SET.u/¤FIND-SET./
7ADA[
f
.u; /
g
8U
NION.u; /
9returnA
Figure 23.4 shows how Kruskal’s algorithm works. Lines 1–3 initialize the setA
to the empty set and create
j
V
j
trees, one containing each vertex.  Theforloop in
lines 5–8 examines  edges in order  of  weight,  from lowest  to highest.   The loop

632Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
2
76
(a)(b)
(c)(d)
(e)
(g)
(f)
(h)
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
Figure 23.4The execution of Kruskal’s algorithm on the graph from Figure 23.1.  Shaded edges
belong to the forestAbeing grown.  The algorithm considers each edge in sorted order by weight.
An arrow points to the edge under consideration at each step of the algorithm. If the edge joins two
distinct trees in the forest, it is added to the forest, thereby merging the two trees.
checks,  for each edge.u; /, whether the endpointsuandbelong to the same
tree. If they do, then the edge.u; /cannot be added to the forest without creating
a cycle, and the edge is discarded.  Otherwise, the two vertices belong to different
trees.  In this case, line 7 adds the edge.u; /toA, and line 8 merges the vertices
in the two trees.

23.2The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim633
(i)(j)
(k)(l)
(n)(m)
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
22
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
2
2
Figure 23.4, continuedFurther steps in the execution of Kruskal’s algorithm.
The  running  time  of  Kruskal’s  algorithm  for  a  graphGD.V; E/depends
on  how  we  implement  the  disjoint-set  data  structure.   We  assume  that  we  use
the disjoint-set-forest implementation of Section 21.3 with the union-by-rank and
path-compression heuristics, since it is the asymptotically fastest implementation
known.  Initializing the setAin line 1 takesO.1/time, and the time to sort the
edges in line 4 isO.ElgE/. (We will account for the cost of the
j
V
j
M
AKE-SET
operations in theforloop of lines 2–3 in a moment.)  Theforloop of lines 5–8
performsO.E/F
IND-SETand UNIONoperations on the disjoint-set forest. Along
with the
j
V
j
M
AKE-SEToperations, these take a total ofO..VCE/  ̨.V //time,
where ̨is the very slowly growing function defined in Section 21.4.  Because we
assume thatGis connected, we have
j
E
j

j
V
j
1, and so the disjoint-set opera-
tions takeO.E  ̨.V //time. Moreover, since ̨.
j
V
j
/DO.lgV/DO.lgE/,theto-
tal running time of Kruskal’s algorithm isO.ElgE/. Observing that
j
E
j
<
j
V
j
2
,
we have lg
j
E
j
DO.lgV/, and so we can restate the running time of Kruskal’s
algorithm asO.ElgV/.

634Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
Prim’s algorithm
Like Kruskal’s algorithm,  Prim’s algorithm  is a special case of the generic min-
imum-spanning-tree  method from Section 23.1.  Prim’s algorithm operates much
like Dijkstra’s algorithm for finding shortest paths in a graph, which we shall see in
Section 24.3.  Prim’s algorithm has the property that the edges in the setAalways
form  a single  tree.   As Figure 23.5 shows,  the tree  starts from  an arbitrary  root
vertexrand grows until the tree spans all the vertices inV. Each step adds to the
treeAa light edge that connectsAto an isolated vertex—one on which no edge
ofAis incident.  By Corollary 23.2, this rule adds only edges that are safe forA;
therefore, when the algorithm terminates, the edges inAform a minimum spanning
tree. This strategy qualifies as greedy since at each step it adds to the tree an edge
that contributes the minimum amount possible to the tree’s weight.
In order to implement Prim’s algorithm efficiently, we need a fast way to select
a new edge to add to the tree formed by the edges inA. In the pseudocode below,
the connected graphGand the rootrof the minimum spanning tree to be grown
are inputs  to the algorithm.   During execution  of  the algorithm,  all  vertices  that
arenotin the tree reside in a min-priority queueQbased on akeyattribute.  For
each vertex, the attribute:keyis the minimum weight of any edge connecting
to a vertex in the tree;  by convention,:keyD1if there is no such edge.  The
attribute:names the parent ofin the tree. The algorithm implicitly maintains
the setAfrom G
ENERIC-MST as
AD
f
.; : /W2V
f
r
g
Q
g
:
When the algorithm terminates, the min-priority queueQis empty; the minimum
spanning treeAforGis thus
AD
f
.; : /W2V
f
r
gg
:
MST-P
RIM.G;w;r/
1foreachu2G:V
2u:keyD1
3u: D
NIL
4r:keyD0
5QDG:V
6whileQ¤;
7uDE
XTRACT-MIN.Q/
8foreach2G:AdjŒu
9if2Qandw.u; / < :key
10:Du
11:keyDw.u; /

23.2The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim635
(a)(b)
(c)(d)
(e)(f)
(g)(h)
(i)
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
2
76
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
2
76
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
2
76
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
b
a
h
c
g
i
d
f
e
4
8
11
87
9
10
144
21
76
2
Figure 23.5The execution of Prim’s algorithm on the graph from Figure 23.1.  The root vertex
isa.  Shaded edges are in the tree being grown, and black vertices are in the tree.  At each step of
the algorithm, the vertices in the tree determine a cut of the graph, and a light edge crossing the cut
is added to the tree.  In the second step, for example,  the algorithm has a choice of adding either
edge.b; c/or edge.a; h/to the tree since both are light edges crossing the cut.

636Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
Figure 23.5 shows how Prim’s algorithm works.  Lines 1–5 set the key of each
vertex  to1(except  for  the  rootr,  whose  key  is  set  to0so  that  it  will  be  the
first vertex processed), set the parent of each vertex to
NIL, and initialize the min-
priority queueQto contain all the vertices. The algorithm maintains the following
three-part loop invariant:
Prior to each iteration of thewhileloop of lines 6–11,
1.AD
f
.; : /W2V
f
r
g
Q
g
.
2. The vertices already placed into the minimum spanning tree are those in
VQ.
3. For all  vertices2Q,if:¤
NIL,then:key<1and:keyis
the weight of a light edge.; : /connectingto some vertex already
placed into the minimum spanning tree.
Line  7  identifies  a  vertexu2Qincident  on  a  light  edge  that  crosses  the  cut
.VQ; Q/(with the exception of the first iteration, in whichuDrdue to line 4).
Removingufrom the setQadds it to the setVQof vertices in the tree, thus
adding.u; u:  /toA.Theforloop of lines 8–11 updates thekeyandattributes
of every vertexadjacent toubut not in the tree, thereby maintaining the third
part of the loop invariant.
The running time of Prim’s algorithm depends on how we implement the min-
priority queueQ.  If we implementQas a binary min-heap (see Chapter 6), we
can use the B
UILD-MIN-HEAPprocedure to perform lines 1–5 inO.V /time. The
body of thewhileloop executes
j
V
j
times, and since each E
XTRACT-MINopera-
tion takesO.lgV/time, the total time for all calls to E
XTRACT-MINisO.VlgV/.
Theforloop in lines 8–11 executesO.E/times altogether,  since the sum of the
lengths of all adjacency lists is2
j
E
j
.  Within theforloop, we can implement the
test for membership inQin line 9 in constant time by keeping a bit for each vertex
that tells whether or not it is inQ, and updating the bit when the vertex is removed
fromQ.  The assignment in line 11 involves an implicit D
ECREASE-KEYopera-
tion on the min-heap, which a binary min-heap supports inO.lgV/time.  Thus,
the total time for Prim’s algorithm isO.VlgVCElgV/DO.ElgV/,whichis
asymptotically the same as for our implementation of Kruskal’s algorithm.
We can improve the asymptotic running time of Prim’s algorithm by using Fi-
bonacci heaps.  Chapter 19 shows that if a Fibonacci heap holds
j
V
j
elements, an
E
XTRACT-MINoperation  takesO.lgV/amortized time and a DECREASE-KEY
operation (to implement line 11) takesO.1/amortized time. Therefore, if we use a
Fibonacci heap to implement the min-priority queueQ, the running time of Prim’s
algorithm improves toO.ECVlgV/.

23.2The algorithms of Kruskal and Prim637
Exercises
23.2-1
Kruskal’s algorithm can return different spanning trees for the same input graphG,
depending on how it breaks ties when the edges are sorted into order.  Show that
for each minimum spanning treeTofG, there is a way to sort the edges ofGin
Kruskal’s algorithm so that the algorithm returnsT.
23.2-2
Suppose that we represent the graphGD.V; E/as an adjacency matrix.  Give a
simple implementation of Prim’s algorithm for this case that runs inO.V
2
/time.
23.2-3
For  a  sparse  graphGD.V; E/,where
j
E
j
D‚.V /,  is  the  implementation  of
Prim’s algorithm with a Fibonacci heap asymptotically faster than the binary-heap
implementation?   What  about  for  a  dense  graph,  where
j
E
j
D‚.V
2
/?How
must the sizes
j
E
j
and
j
V
j
be related  for the Fibonacci-heap  implementation  to
be asymptotically faster than the binary-heap implementation?
23.2-4
Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from1to
j
V
j
.
How fast can you make Kruskal’s algorithm  run?  What if the edge weights are
integers in the range from1toWfor some constantW?
23.2-5
Suppose that all edge weights in a graph are integers in the range from1to
j
V
j
.
How fast can you make Prim’s algorithm run? What if the edge weights are integers
in the range from1toWfor some constantW?
23.2-6?
Suppose that the edge weights in a graph are uniformly distributed over the half-
open  intervalŒ0; 1/.   Which  algorithm,  Kruskal’s  or  Prim’s,  can  you  make  run
faster?
23.2-7?
Suppose  that  a graphGhas a minimum  spanning  tree already  computed.   How
quickly  can  we update  the  minimum  spanning  tree  if  we add  a new  vertex  and
incident edges toG?
23.2-8
Professor  Borden  proposes  a  new  divide-and-conquer  algorithm  for  computing
minimum  spanning  trees,  which  goes  as  follows.   Given  a  graphGD.V; E/,
partition the setVof vertices into two setsV
1
andV
2
such that
j
V
1
j
and
j
V
2
j
differ

638Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
by at most1.LetE
1
be the set of edges that are incident only on vertices inV
1
,and
letE
2
be the set of edges that are incident only on vertices inV
2
. Recursively solve
a minimum-spanning-tree problem on each of the two subgraphsG
1
D.V
1
;E
1
/
andG
2
D.V
2
;E
2
/. Finally, select the minimum-weight edge inEthat crosses the
cut.V
1
;V
2
/, and use this edge to unite the resulting two minimum spanning trees
into a single spanning tree.
Either  argue  that  the  algorithm  correctly  computes  a  minimum  spanning  tree
ofG, or provide an example for which the algorithm fails.
Problems
23-1  Second-best minimum spanning tree
LetGD.V; E/be  an  undirected,  connected  graph  whose  weight  function  is
wWE!R, and suppose that
j
E
j

j
V
j
and all edge weights are distinct.
We define a second-best  minimum spanning tree as follows.  LetTbe the set
of all spanning  trees ofG,andletT
0
be a minimum spanning  tree ofG.Then
asecond-best minimum spanning treeis a spanning  treeTsuch thatw.T /D
min
T
00
2TfT
0
g
f
w.T
00
/
g
.
a.Show that the minimum spanning tree is unique, but that the second-best mini-
mum spanning tree need not be unique.
b.LetTbe  the  minimum  spanning  tree  ofG.    Prove  thatGcontains  edges
.u; /2Tand.x; y/62Tsuch thatT
f
.u; /
g
[
f
.x; y/
g
is a second-best
minimum spanning tree ofG.
c.LetTbe a spanning tree ofGand, for any two verticesu; 2V,letmaxŒu; 
denote an edge of maximum weight on the unique simple path betweenuand
inT. Describe anO.V
2
/-time algorithm that, givenT, computesmaxŒu; for
allu; 2V.
d.Give an efficient algorithm to compute the second-best minimum spanning tree
ofG.
23-2  Minimum spanning tree in sparse graphs
For a very sparse connected graphGD.V; E/, we can further improve upon the
O.ECVlgV/running time of Prim’s algorithm with Fibonacci heaps by prepro-
cessingGto decrease the number of vertices before running Prim’s algorithm.  In
particular, we choose, for each vertexu, the minimum-weight edge.u; /incident
onu, and we put.u; /into the minimum spanning tree under construction.  We

Problems for Chapter 23639
then  contract  all  chosen  edges  (see  Section  B.4).   Rather  than  contracting  these
edges one at a time, we first identify sets of vertices that are united into the same
new vertex.  Then we create the graph that would have resulted from contracting
these edges one at a time, but we do so by “renaming” edges according to the sets
into which their endpoints were placed. Several edges from the original graph may
be renamed the same as each other.  In such a case, only one edge results, and its
weight is the minimum of the weights of the corresponding original edges.
Initially,  we set the minimum spanning treeTbeing constructed to be empty,
and  for  each  edge.u; /2E,  we initialize  the  attributes.u; /:origD.u; /
and.u; /:cDw.u; /.Weusetheorigattribute to reference the edge from the
initial graph that is associated with an edge in the contracted graph. Thecattribute
holds the weight of an edge, and as edges are contracted, we update it according to
the above scheme for choosing edge weights. The procedure MST-R
EDUCEtakes
inputsGandT, and it returns a contracted graphG
0
with updated attributesorig
0
andc
0
.  The procedure also accumulates edges ofGinto the minimum spanning
treeT.
MST-R
EDUCE.G; T /
1foreach2G:V
2:markD
FALSE
3MAKE-SET./
4foreachu2G:V
5ifu:mark
==FALSE
6choose2G:AdjŒusuch that.u; /:cis minimized
7U
NION.u; /
8TDT[
f
.u; /:orig
g
9u:markD:markD
TRUE
10G
0
:VD
f
FIND-SET./W2G:V
g
11G
0
:ED;
12foreach.x; y/2G:E
13uDF
IND-SET.x/
14DF
IND-SET.y/
15if.u; /62G
0
:E
16G
0
:EDG
0
:E[
f
.u; /
g
17.u; /:orig
0
D.x; y/:orig
18.u; /: c
0
D.x; y/:c
19else if.x; y/:c<.u;/:c
0
20.u; /:orig
0
D.x; y/:orig
21.u; /: c
0
D.x; y/:c
22construct adjacency listsG
0
:AdjforG
0
23returnG
0
andT

640Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
a.LetTbe the set of edges returned by MST-REDUCE,andletAbe the minimum
spanning tree of the graphG
0
formed by the call MST-PRIM.G
0
;c
0
;r/,wherec
0
is the weight attribute on the edges ofG
0
:Eandris any vertex inG
0
:V. Prove
thatT[
f
.x; y/:orig
0
W.x; y/2A
g
is a minimum spanning tree ofG.
b.Argue that
j
G
0
:V
j

j
V
j
=2.
c.Show how to implement MST-R
EDUCEso that it runs inO.E/time.  (Hint:
Use simple data structures.)
d.Suppose that we runkphases of MST-R
EDUCE, using the outputG
0
produced
by one phase as the inputGto the next phase and accumulating edges inT.
Argue that the overall running time of thekphases isO.kE/.
e.Suppose that after runningkphases of MST-R
EDUCE, as in part (d), we run
Prim’s algorithm by calling MST-P
RIM.G
0
;c
0
;r/,whereG
0
, with weight at-
tributec
0
, is returned by the last phase andris any vertex inG
0
:V.Showhow
to  pickkso  that  the  overall  running  time  isO.Elg lgV/.   Argue  that  your
choice ofkminimizes the overall asymptotic running time.
f.Forwhatvaluesof
j
E
j
(in terms of
j
V
j
) does Prim’s algorithm with preprocess-
ing asymptotically beat Prim’s algorithm without preprocessing?
23-3  Bottleneck spanning tree
Abottleneck spanning treeTof an undirected graphGis a spanning tree ofG
whose largest edge weight is minimum over all spanning trees ofG.  We say that
the  value  of  the bottleneck  spanning  tree  is the weight  of  the  maximum-weight
edge inT.
a.Argue that a minimum spanning tree is a bottleneck spanning tree.
Part  (a)  shows  that  finding  a  bottleneck  spanning  tree  is  no  harder  than  finding
a  minimum  spanning  tree.   In  the  remaining  parts,  we  will show  how  to  find  a
bottleneck spanning tree in linear time.
b.Give a linear-time algorithm that given a graphGand an integerb, determines
whether the value of the bottleneck spanning tree is at mostb.
c.Use your algorithm for part (b) as a subroutine in a linear-time algorithm for
the bottleneck-spanning-tree problem. (Hint:You may want to use a subroutine
that  contracts  sets of  edges,  as in the  MST-R
EDUCEprocedure  described  in
Problem 23-2.)

Notes for Chapter 23641
23-4  Alternative minimum-spanning-tree algorithms
In this problem, we give pseudocode for three different algorithms. Each one takes
a connected graph and a weight function as input and returns a set of edgesT.For
each algorithm, either prove thatTis a minimum spanning tree or prove thatTis
not a minimum spanning tree.  Also describe the most efficient implementation of
each algorithm, whether or not it computes a minimum spanning tree.
a.
M
AY B E-MST-A.G; w/
1sort the edges into nonincreasing order of edge weightsw
2TDE
3foreach edgee, taken in nonincreasing order by weight
4ifT
f
e
g
is a connected graph
5TDT
f
e
g
6returnT
b.
M
AY B E-MST-B.G; w/
1TD;
2foreach edgee, taken in arbitrary order
3ifT[
f
e
g
has no cycles
4TDT[
f
e
g
5returnT
c.
M
AY B E-MST-C.G; w/
1TD;
2foreach edgee, taken in arbitrary order
3TDT[
f
e
g
4ifThas a cyclec
5lete
0
be a maximum-weight edge onc
6TDT
f
e
0
g
7returnT
Chapter notes
Tarjan [330] surveys the minimum-spanning-tree problem and provides excellent
advanced material.  Graham and Hell [151] compiled a history of the minimum-
spanning-tree problem.
Tarjan attributes the first minimum-spanning-tree algorithm to a 1926 paper by
O. Bor  ̇uvka.   Bor  ̇uvka’s  algorithm  consists  of  runningO.lgV/iterations  of  the

642Chapter 23Minimum Spanning Trees
procedure  MST-REDUCEdescribed  in  Problem  23-2.   Kruskal’s  algorithm  was
reported  by  Kruskal  [222]  in 1956.   The algorithm  commonly  known  as Prim’s
algorithm was indeed invented by Prim [285], but it was also invented earlier by
V. Jarn ́ık in 1930.
The reason underlying why greedy algorithms are effective at finding minimum
spanning trees is that the set of forests of a graph forms a graphic matroid.  (See
Section 16.4.)
When
j
E
j
D.VlgV/, Prim’s algorithm, implemented with Fibonacci heaps,
runs  inO.E/time.   For  sparser  graphs,  using  a combination  of  the  ideas  from
Prim’s algorithm, Kruskal’s algorithm, and Bor  ̇uvka’s algorithm, together with ad-
vanced data structures,  Fredman and Tarjan [114] give an algorithm that runs in
O.Elg

V/time.   Gabow,  Galil,  Spencer,  and Tarjan [120] improved this algo-
rithm  to  run  inO.Elg lg

V/time.   Chazelle  [60] gives  an  algorithm  that  runs
inO.Ey ̨.E; V //time, wherey ̨.E; V /is the functional inverse of Ackermann’s
function.  (See the chapter  notes for Chapter 21 for a brief discussion  of Acker-
mann’s function and its inverse.)  Unlike previous minimum-spanning-tree  algo-
rithms, Chazelle’s algorithm does not follow the greedy method.
A related problem isspanning-tree verification, in which we are given a graph
GD.V; E/and a treeTE, and we wish to determine whetherTis a minimum
spanning tree ofG.  King [203] gives a linear-time algorithm to verify a spanning
tree, building on earlier work of Koml  ́os [215] and Dixon, Rauch, and Tarjan [90].
The above algorithms are all deterministic  and fall into the comparison-based
model described in Chapter 8.  Karger, Klein, and Tarjan [195] give a randomized
minimum-spanning-tree  algorithm  that  runs  inO.VCE/expected  time.   This
algorithm uses recursion in a manner similar to the linear-time selection algorithm
in Section 9.3:  a recursive call on an auxiliary problem identifies a subset of the
edgesE
0
that  cannot  be in any minimum spanning  tree.   Another  recursive  call
onEE
0
then finds the minimum spanning tree.  The algorithm also uses ideas
from Bor  ̇uvka’s algorithm and King’s algorithm for spanning-tree verification.
Fredman  and  Willard  [116] showed  how  to find a minimum  spanning  tree in
O.VCE/time using a deterministic algorithm that is not comparison based. Their
algorithm assumes that the data areb-bit integers and that the computer memory
consists of addressableb-bit words.

24Single-Source Shortest Paths
Professor Patrick wishes to find the shortest possible route from Phoenix to Indi-
anapolis.  Given a road map of the United States on which the distance between
each pair of adjacent intersections is marked, how can she determine this shortest
route?
One possible way would be to enumerate all the routes from Phoenix to Indi-
anapolis, add up the distances on each route, and select the shortest.  It is easy to
see,  however,  that even disallowing  routes that contain cycles,  Professor  Patrick
would have to examine an enormous number of possibilities,  most of which are
simply not worth considering.  For example, a route from Phoenix to Indianapolis
that passes through Seattle is obviously a poor choice, because Seattle is several
hundred miles out of the way.
In  this  chapter  and  in  Chapter  25,  we  show  how  to  solve  such  problems  ef-
ficiently.   In ashortest-paths problem,  we are given a weighted,  directed  graph
GD.V; E/,  with weight functionwWE!Rmapping  edges to real-valued
weights.  Theweightw.p/of pathpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
iis the sum of the weights
of its constituent edges:
w.p/D
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/:
We define theshortest-path weightı.u; /fromutoby
ı.u; /D
(
minfw.p/Wu
p
gif there is a path fromuto;
1otherwise:
Ashortest pathfrom vertexuto vertexis then defined as any pathpwith weight
w.p/Dı.u; /.
In the Phoenix-to-Indianapolis example, we can model the road map as a graph:
vertices represent intersections,  edges represent road segments between intersec-
tions, and edge weights represent road distances. Our goal is to find a shortest path
from a given intersection in Phoenix to a given intersection in Indianapolis.

644Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
Edge  weights  can  represent  metrics  other  than  distances,  such  as  time,  cost,
penalties,  loss,  or any other  quantity  that accumulates  linearly  along  a path and
that we would want to minimize.
The breadth-first-search  algorithm  from  Section 22.2 is a shortest-paths  algo-
rithm that works on unweighted graphs, that is, graphs in which each edge has unit
weight.  Because many of the concepts from breadth-first search arise in the study
of shortest paths in weighted graphs, you might want to review Section 22.2 before
proceeding.
Variants
In this chapter, we shall focus on thesingle-source shortest-paths problem:given
agraphGD.V; E/, we want to find a shortest path from a givensourcevertex
s2Vto each vertex2V.  The algorithm  for the single-source  problem can
solve many other problems, including the following variants.
Single-destination shortest-paths problem:Find a shortest path to a givendes-
tinationvertextfrom each vertex. By reversing the direction of each edge in
the graph, we can reduce this problem to a single-source problem.
Single-pair shortest-path problem:Find a shortest  path fromutofor  given
verticesuand.  If we solve the single-source problem with source vertexu,
we solve this problem also.  Moreover, all known algorithms for this problem
have  the  same  worst-case  asymptotic  running  time  as  the  best  single-source
algorithms.
All-pairs shortest-paths problem:Find a shortest path fromutofor every pair
of verticesuand.  Although we can solve this problem by running a single-
source algorithm once from each vertex, we usually can solve it faster.  Addi-
tionally,  its structure is interesting in its own right.  Chapter 25 addresses the
all-pairs problem in detail.
Optimal substructure of a shortest path
Shortest-paths  algorithms  typically  rely  on  the  property  that  a  shortest  path  be-
tween  two vertices  contains  other  shortest  paths  within it.   (The Edmonds-Karp
maximum-flow  algorithm  in  Chapter  26  also  relies  on  this  property.)Recall
that optimal substructure is one of the key indicators that dynamic programming
(Chapter  15)  and the greedy method (Chapter  16)  might apply.   Dijkstra’s algo-
rithm, which we shall see in Section 24.3, is a greedy algorithm,  and the Floyd-
Warshall algorithm,  which finds shortest paths between all pairs of vertices (see
Section 25.2), is a dynamic-programming algorithm.  The following lemma states
the optimal-substructure property of shortest paths more precisely.

Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths645
Lemma 24.1 (Subpaths of shortest paths are shortest paths)
Given a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/with weight functionwWE!R,
letpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
ibe a shortest path from vertex
0
to vertex
k
and, for any
iandjsuch that0ijk,letp
ij
Dh
i
;
iC1
;:::;
j
ibe the subpath ofp
from vertex
i
to vertex
j
. Then,p
ij
is a shortest path from
i
to
j
.
ProofIf we decompose pathpinto
0
p
0i

i
p
ij

j
p
jk

k
, then we have that
w.p/Dw.p
0i
/Cw.p
ij
/Cw.p
jk
/. Now, assume that there is a pathp
0
ij
from
i
to
j
with weightw.p
0
ij
/<w.p
ij
/. Then,
0
p
0i

i
p
0
ij

j
p
jk

k
is a path from
0
to
k
whose weightw.p
0i
/Cw.p
0
ij
/Cw.p
jk
/is less thanw.p/, which contradicts
the assumption thatpis a shortest path from
0
to
k
.
Negative-weight edges
Some  instances  of  the  single-source  shortest-paths  problem  may  include  edges
whose  weights  are  negative.    If  the  graphGD.V; E/contains  no  negative-
weight cycles reachable  from the sources,  then for  all2V,  the shortest-path
weightı.s; /remains well defined, even if it has a negative value.  If the graph
contains a negative-weight cycle reachable froms, however, shortest-path weights
are  not  well  defined.   No  path  fromsto  a  vertex  on  the  cycle  can  be  a  short-
est path—we can always find a path with lower weight by following the proposed
“shortest” path and then traversing the negative-weight cycle. If there is a negative-
weight cycle on some path fromsto,wedefineı.s; /D1.
Figure  24.1  illustrates  the  effect  of  negative  weights  and  negative-weight  cy-
cles  on  shortest-path  weights.   Because  there  is  only  one  path  fromstoa(the
pathhs; ai),  we haveı.s; a/Dw.s; a/D3.   Similarly,  there is only one path
fromstob,andsoı.s; b/Dw.s; a/Cw.a; b/D3C.4/D1.Thereare
infinitely many paths fromstoc:hs; ci,hs; c; d; ci,hs; c; d; c; d; ci, and so on.
Because the cyclehc; d; cihas weight6C.3/D3>0, the shortest path froms
toc
ishs; ci, with weightı.s; c/Dw.s; c/D5. Similarly, the shortest path froms
todishs; c; di, with weightı.s; d /Dw.s; c/Cw.c; d/D11. Analogously, there
are infinitely many paths fromstoe:hs; ei,hs; e; f; ei,hs; e; f; e; f; ei,andso
on.  Because the cyclehe; f; eihas weight3C.6/D3<0,however,there
is no shortest path fromstoe.  By traversing the negative-weight cyclehe; f; ei
arbitrarily many times, we can find paths fromstoewith arbitrarily large negative
weights, and soı.s; e/D1. Similarly,ı.s; f /D1. Becausegis reachable
fromf, we can also find paths with arbitrarily large negative weights fromstog,
and soı.s; g/D1. Verticesh,i,andjalso form a negative-weight cycle. They
are not reachable froms, however, and soı.s; h/D
ı.s; i/Dı.s; j /D1.

646Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
5
c
11
d
6
–3
–∞
e
–∞
f
3
–6
3
a
–1
b
0
s
–∞
g
–4
5
3
2
8
4
7
∞
h
∞
i
2
∞
j
–83
Figure 24.1Negative edge weights in a directed graph.  The shortest-path weight from sources
appears within each vertex. Because verticeseandfform a negative-weight cycle reachable froms,
they have shortest-path weights of1. Because vertexgis reachable from a vertex whose shortest-
path weight is1, it, too, has a shortest-path weight of1.  Vertices such ash,i,andjare not
reachable froms, and so their shortest-path weights are1, even though they lie on a negative-weight
cycle.
Some shortest-paths  algorithms,  such  as  Dijkstra’s  algorithm,  assume  that  all
edge weights in the input graph are nonnegative, as in the road-map example. Oth-
ers,  such as the Bellman-Ford algorithm,  allow negative-weight  edges in the in-
put graph and produce a correct answer as long as no negative-weight cycles are
reachable from the source.  Typically, if there is such a negative-weight cycle, the
algorithm can detect and report its existence.
Cycles
Can a shortest  path  contain  a cycle?   As we have just  seen,  it  cannot  contain  a
negative-weight  cycle.   Nor can it contain a positive-weight  cycle,  since remov-
ing the cycle from the path produces a path with the same source and destination
vertices and a lower path weight.  That is, ifpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
iisapathand
cDh
i
;
iC1
;:::;
j
iis a positive-weight cycle on this path (so that
i
D
j
and
w.c/ >  0),  then the pathp
0
Dh
0
;
1
; :::; 
i
;
jC1
;
jC2
; :::; 
k
ihas weight
w.p
0
/Dw.p/w.c/ < w.p/,andsopcannot be a shortest path from
0
to
k
.
That leaves only0-weight cycles.  We can remove a0-weight cycle from any
path to produce another path whose weight is the same. Thus, if there is a shortest
path from a source vertexsto a destination vertexthat contains a0-weight cycle,
then there is another shortest  path fromstowithout  this cycle.   As long as a
shortest path has0-weight cycles, we can repeatedly remove these cycles from the
path  until we have a shortest  path that is cycle-free.   Therefore,  without loss of
generality  we can assume that when we are finding shortest  paths,  they have no
cycles, i.e., they are simple paths.  Since any acyclic path in a graphGD.V; E/

Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths647
contains at most
j
V
j
distinct vertices, it also contains at most
j
V
j
1edges. Thus,
we can restrict our attention to shortest paths of at most
j
V
j
1edges.
Representing shortest paths
We often wish to compute not only shortest-path weights, but the vertices on short-
est  paths  as  well.   We represent  shortest  paths  similarly  to  how  we  represented
breadth-first  trees in Section 22.2.  Given a graphGD.V; E/, we maintain for
each vertex2Vapredecessor:that is either another vertex or
NIL.The
shortest-paths algorithms in this chapter set theattributes so that the chain of pre-
decessors originating at a vertexruns backwards along a shortest path fromsto.
Thus, given a vertexfor which:¤
NIL, the procedure PRINT-PAT H.G;s;/
from Section 22.2 will print a shortest path fromsto.
In the midst of executing a shortest-paths algorithm, however, thevalues might
not indicate shortest paths. As in breadth-first search, we shall be interested in the
predecessor subgraphG

D.V

;E

/induced by thevalues.  Here again, we
define the vertex setV

to be the set of vertices ofGwith non-NILpredecessors,
plus the sources:
V

D
f
2VW:¤NIL
g
[
f
s
g
:
The directed edge setE

is the set of edges induced by thevalues for vertices
inV

:
E

D
f
.: ; /2EW2V


f
s
gg
:
We shall prove that thevalues produced by the algorithms in this chapter have
the property that at terminationG

is a “shortest-paths tree”—informally, a rooted
tree containing a shortest path from the sourcesto every vertex that is reachable
froms.  A shortest-paths tree is like the breadth-first tree from Section 22.2, but it
contains shortest paths from the source defined in terms of edge weights instead of
numbers of edges.  To be precise, letGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph
with weight functionwWE!R, and assume thatGcontains no negative-weight
cycles  reachable  from  the  source  vertexs2V,  so  that  shortest  paths  are  well
defined.  Ashortest-paths treerooted atsis a directed subgraphG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/,
whereV
0
VandE
0
E, such that
1.V
0
is the set of vertices reachable fromsinG,
2.G
0
forms a rooted tree with roots,and
3.  for all2V
0
, the unique simple path fromstoinG
0
is a shortest path froms
toinG.

648Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
(a)(b)(c)
0
6
6
7212
4
3
5
3
s
tx
yz
39
511
0
6
6
7212
4
3
5
3
s
tx
yz
39
511
0
6
6
7212
4
3
5
3
s
tx
yz
39
511
Figure 24.2  (a)A weighted,  directed graph with shortest-path weights  from sources.(b)The
shaded edges form a shortest-paths tree rooted at the sources.(c)Another shortest-paths tree with
the same root.
Shortest paths are not necessarily unique, and neither are shortest-paths trees.  For
example, Figure 24.2 shows a weighted, directed graph and two shortest-paths trees
with the same root.
Relaxation
The algorithms  in this chapter  use the technique  ofrelaxation.   For each vertex
2V, we maintain an attribute:d, which is an upper bound on the weight of
a  shortest  path  from  sourcesto.   We  call:dashortest-path estimate.We
initialize the shortest-path estimates and predecessors by the following‚.V /-time
procedure:
I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/
1foreach vertex2G:V
2:dD1
3:D
NIL
4s:dD0
After initialization, we have:D
NILfor all2V,s:dD0,and:dD1for
2V
f
s
g
.
The process ofrelaxingan edge.u; /consists of testing whether we can im-
prove  the  shortest  path  tofound  so far  by going  throughuand,  if  so,  updat-
ing:dand:.  A relaxation step
1
may decrease the value of the shortest-path
1
The use of the term is historical.  The outcome of a relaxation step can be viewed as a relaxation
of the constraint:du:dCw.u; /, which, by the triangle inequality (Lemma 24.10), must be
satisfied ifu:dDı.s; u/and:dDı.s; /.Thatis,if:du:dCw.u; /, there is no “pressure”
It may seem strange that the term “relaxation” is used for an operation that tightens an upper bound.
so the constraint is “relaxed.”
to satisfy this constraint,

Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths649
uv
59
2
uv
57
2
RELAX(u,v,w)
(a)(b)
uv
56
2
uv
56
2
RELAX(u,v,w)
Figure 24.3Relaxing an edge.u; /with weightw.u; /D2. The shortest-path estimate of each
vertex appears within the vertex.(a)Because:d>u:dCw.u; /prior to relaxation, the value
of:ddecreases.(b)Here,:du:dCw.u; /before relaxing the edge, and so the relaxation step
leaves:dunchanged.
estimate:dand update’s predecessor  attribute:.  The following code per-
forms a relaxation step on edge.u; /inO.1/time:
R
ELAX.u;;w/
1if:d>u:dCw.u; /
2:dDu:dCw.u; /
3:Du
Figure 24.3 shows two examples of relaxing an edge, one in which a shortest-path
estimate decreases and one in which no estimate changes.
Each algorithm in this chapter calls I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCEandthenre-
peatedly relaxes edges. Moreover, relaxation is the only means by which shortest-
path estimates and predecessors  change.  The algorithms in this chapter differ in
how many times they relax each edge and the order in which they relax edges. Dijk-
stra’s algorithm and the shortest-paths algorithm for directed acyclic graphs relax
each edge exactly once.  The Bellman-Ford algorithm relaxes each edge
j
V
j
1
times.
Properties of shortest paths and relaxation
To prove the algorithms in this chapter correct,  we shall appeal to several prop-
erties of shortest  paths  and relaxation.   We state these properties  here,  and Sec-
tion 24.5 proves them formally.  For your reference, each property stated here in-
cludes the appropriate lemma or corollary number from Section 24.5.  The latter
five of these properties, which refer to shortest-path estimates or the predecessor
subgraph, implicitly assume that the graph is initialized with a call to I
NITIALIZE-
S
INGLE-SOURCE.G; s/and that the only way that shortest-path estimates and the
predecessor subgraph change are by some sequence of relaxation steps.

650Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
Triangle inequality(Lemma 24.10)
For any edge.u; /2E,wehaveı.s; /ı.s; u/Cw.u; /.
Upper-bound property(Lemma 24.11)
We always have:dı.s; /for all vertices2V, and once:dachieves the
valueı.s; /, it never changes.
No-path property(Corollary 24.12)
If there is no path fromsto,thenwealwayshave:dDı.s; /D1.
Convergence property(Lemma 24.14)
Ifsu!is a shortest path inGfor someu; 2V,andifu:dDı.s; u/at
any time prior to relaxing edge.u; /,then:dDı.s; /at all times afterward.
Path-relaxation property(Lemma 24.15)
IfpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
iis a shortest path fromsD
0
to
k
, and we relax the
edges ofpin the order.
0
;
1
/; .
1
;
2
/;:::;.
k1
;
k
/,then
k
:dDı.s; 
k
/.
This property holds regardless of any other relaxation steps that occur, even if
they are intermixed with relaxations of the edges ofp.
Predecessor-subgraph property(Lemma 24.17)
Once:dDı.s; /for all2V, the predecessor subgraph is a shortest-paths
tree rooted ats.
Chapter outline
Section 24.1 presents the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which solves the single-source
shortest-paths problem in the general case in which edges can have negative weight.
The Bellman-Ford algorithm is remarkably simple, and it has the further benefit
of detecting whether a negative-weight cycle is reachable from the source.  Sec-
tion 24.2 gives a linear-time algorithm for computing shortest paths from a single
source in a directed acyclic graph. Section 24.3 covers Dijkstra’s algorithm, which
has a lower running time than the Bellman-Ford algorithm but requires the edge
weights to be nonnegative.  Section 24.4 shows how we can use the Bellman-Ford
algorithm  to  solve  a  special  case  of  linear  programming.   Finally,  Section  24.5
proves the properties of shortest paths and relaxation stated above.
We require some conventions for doing arithmetic with infinities.  We shall as-
sume that for any real numbera¤1,wehaveaC1D1CaD1. Also, to
make our proofs hold in the presence of negative-weight cycles, we shall assume
that for any real numbera¤1,wehaveaC.1/D.1/CaD1.
All algorithms in this chapter assume that the directed graphGis stored in the
adjacency-list representation.  Additionally, stored with each edge is its weight, so
that as we traverse each adjacency list, we can determine the edge weights inO.1/
time per edge.

24.1The Bellman-Ford algorithm651
24.1  The Bellman-Ford algorithm
TheBellman-Ford algorithmsolves the single-source  shortest-paths  problem in
the general case in which edge weights may be negative.  Given a weighted,  di-
rected graphGD.V; E/with sourcesand weight functionwWE!R,the
Bellman-Ford algorithm returns a boolean value indicating whether or not there is
a negative-weight  cycle that is reachable  from the source.  If there is such a cy-
cle, the algorithm indicates that no solution exists.  If there is no such cycle, the
algorithm produces the shortest paths and their weights.
The algorithm  relaxes edges,  progressively  decreasing  an estimate:don the
weight of a shortest path from the sourcesto each vertex2Vuntil it achieves
the actual shortest-path weightı.s; /.  The algorithm returns
TRUEif and only if
the graph contains no negative-weight cycles that are reachable from the source.
B
ELLMAN-FORD.G;w;s/
1I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/
2foriD1to
j
G:V
j
1
3foreach edge.u; /2G:E
4R
ELAX.u;;w/
5foreach edge.u; /2G:E
6if:d>u:dCw.u; /
7return
FALSE
8returnTRUE
Figure  24.4  shows  the  execution  of  the  Bellman-Ford  algorithm  on  a  graph
with5vertices.   After  initializing  thedandvalues  of  all  vertices  in  line  1,
the  algorithm  makes
j
V
j
1passes  over  the  edges  of  the  graph.   Each  pass  is
one iteration of theforloop of lines 2–4 and consists of relaxing each edge of the
graph once.  Figures 24.4(b)–(e) show the state of the algorithm after each of the
four passes over the edges.  After making
j
V
j
1passes,  lines 5–8 check for a
negative-weight cycle and return the appropriate boolean value.  (We’ll see a little
later why this check works.)
The  Bellman-Ford  algorithm  runs  in  timeO.VE/,  since  the  initialization  in
line 1 takes‚.V /time,  each of the
j
V
j
1passes  over  the edges  in lines 2–4
takes‚.E/time, and theforloop of lines 5–7 takesO.E/time.
To prove the correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm, we start by showing that
if there are no negative-weight cycles, the algorithm computes correct shortest-path
weights for all vertices reachable from the source.

652Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
(a)(b)(c)
(d)
0
5
9
7
8
6
7
(e)
tx
s
yz
 –4
  – 3
  – 2
2
7
4
–2
2
0
5
9
7
8
6
7
tx
s
yz
 –4
  – 3
  – 2
2
7
4
2
2
0
5
9
7
8
6
7
tx
s
yz
 –4
  – 3
  – 2
6
7
4
2
2
0
5
9
7
8
6
7
tx
s
yz
 –4
  – 3
  – 2
6
7
∞
∞
2
0
5
9
7
8
6
7
tx
s
yz
 –4
  – 3
  – 2
∞
∞
2
∞
∞
Figure 24.4The execution of the Bellman-Ford algorithm.  The source is vertexs.Thedval-
ues  appear  within  the  vertices,  and  shaded  edges  indicate  predecessor  values:   if  edge.u; /is
shaded,  then:Du.    In  this  particular  example,  each  pass  relaxes  the  edges  in  the  order
.t; x/; .t; y/; .t;  ́/; .x; t /; .y; x/; .y;  ́/; . ́; x/; . ́; s/; .s; t /; .s; y/.(a)The situation just before the
first pass over the edges.(b)–(e)The situation after each successive  pass over the edges.   Thed
andvalues  in  part  (e)  are  the  final  values.The  Bellman-Ford  algorithm  returns
TRUEin  this
example.
Lemma 24.2
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted,  directed  graph  with sourcesand weight  func-
tionwWE!R, and assume thatGcontains no negative-weight cycles that are
reachable froms.  Then, after the
j
V
j
1iterations of theforloop of lines 2–4
of B
ELLMAN-FORD,wehave:dDı.s; /for all verticesthat are reachable
froms.
ProofWe prove the lemma by appealing to the path-relaxation  property.  Con-
sider any vertexthat is reachable froms,andletpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where

0
Dsand
k
D, be any shortest path fromsto.  Because shortest paths are
simple,phas at most
j
V
j
1edges, and sok
j
V
j
1. Each of the
j
V
j
1itera-
tions of theforloop of lines 2–4 relaxes all
j
E
j
edges. Among the edges relaxed in
theith iteration, foriD1;2;:::;k,is.
i1
;
i
/. By the path-relaxation property,
therefore,:dD
k
:dDı.s; 
k
/Dı.s; /.

24.1The Bellman-Ford algorithm653
Corollary 24.3
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted,  directed graph with source vertexsand weight
functionwWE!R, and assume thatGcontains no negative-weight cycles that
are reachable froms.  Then, for each vertex2V, there is a path fromstoif
and only if B
ELLMAN-FORDterminates with:d<1when it is run onG.
ProofThe proof is left as Exercise 24.1-2.
Theorem 24.4 (Correctness of the Bellman-Ford algorithm)
Let  B
ELLMAN-FORDbe  run  on  a  weighted,  directed  graphGD.V; E/with
sourcesand weight functionwWE!R.IfGcontains no negative-weight cycles
that are reachable froms, then the algorithm returns
TRUE,wehave:dDı.s; /
for all vertices2V, and the predecessor  subgraphG

is a shortest-paths  tree
rooted ats.IfGdoes contain a negative-weight cycle reachable froms, then the
algorithm returns
FALSE.
ProofSuppose that graphGcontains no negative-weight cycles that are reach-
able from the sources.  We first prove the claim that at termination,:dDı.s; /
for all vertices2V. If vertexis reachable froms, then Lemma 24.2 proves this
claim.  Ifis not reachable froms, then the claim follows from the no-path prop-
erty. Thus, the claim is proven. The predecessor-subgraph property, along with the
claim, implies thatG

is a shortest-paths tree. Now we use the claim to show that
B
ELLMAN-FORDreturnsTRUE. At termination, we have for all edges.u; /2E,
:dDı.s; /
ı.s; u/Cw.u; /(by the triangle inequality)
Du:dCw.u; / ;
and so none of the tests in line 6 causes B
ELLMAN-FORDto returnFALSE.There-
fore, it returns
TRUE.
Now, suppose that graphGcontains a negative-weight  cycle that is reachable
from the sources; let this cycle becDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
0
D
k
. Then,
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/<0:(24.1)
Assume for the purpose of contradiction that the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns
TRUE.   Thus,
i
:d
i1
:dCw.
i1
;
i
/foriD1;2;:::;k.   Summing  the
inequalities around cyclecgives us

654Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
k
X
iD1

i
:d
k
X
iD1
.
i1
:dCw.
i1
;
i
//
D
k
X
iD1

i1
:dC
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/:
Since
0
D
k
, each vertex incappears exactly once in each of the summations
P
k
iD1

i
:dand
P
k
iD1

i1
:d,andso
k
X
iD1

i
:dD
k
X
iD1

i1
:d:
Moreover, by Corollary 24.3,
i
:dis finite foriD1;2;:::;k. Thus,
0
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/;
which contradicts inequality (24.1). We conclude that the Bellman-Ford algorithm
returns
TRUEif graphGcontains  no negative-weight  cycles  reachable  from the
source, and
FALSEotherwise.
Exercises
24.1-1
Run the Bellman-Ford algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 24.4, using ver-
tex ́as the source. In each pass, relax edges in the same order as in the figure, and
show thedandvalues after each pass.  Now, change the weight of edge. ́; x/
to4and run the algorithm again, usingsas the source.
24.1-2
Prove Corollary 24.3.
24.1-3
Given  a weighted,  directed  graphGD.V; E/with no  negative-weight  cycles,
letmbe the maximum over all vertices2Vof the minimum number of edges
in a shortest path from the sourcesto. (Here, the shortest path is by weight, not
the number of edges.) Suggest a simple change to the Bellman-Ford algorithm that
allows it to terminate inmC1passes, even ifmis not known in advance.
24.1-4
Modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm so that it sets:dto1for all verticesfor
which there is a negative-weight cycle on some path from the source to.

24.2Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs655
24.1-5?
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R.
Give anO.VE/-time algorithm to find, for each vertex2V,thevalueı

./D
min
u2V
f
ı.u; /
g
.
24.1-6?
Suppose that a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/has a negative-weight cycle.
Give an efficient algorithm to list the vertices of one such cycle.  Prove that your
algorithm is correct.
24.2  Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs
By  relaxing  the  edges  of  a  weighted  dag  (directed  acyclic  graph)GD.V; E/
according to a topological sort of its vertices, we can compute shortest paths from
a single source in‚.VCE/time. Shortest paths are always well defined in a dag,
since even if there are negative-weight edges, no negative-weight cycles can exist.
The algorithm starts by topologically sorting the dag (see Section 22.4) to im-
pose a linear ordering on the vertices.  If the dag contains a path from vertexuto
vertex,thenuprecedesin the topological sort. We make just one pass over the
vertices in the topologically sorted order. As we process each vertex, we relax each
edge that leaves the vertex.
D
AG-SHORTEST-PAT H S.G;w;s/
1    topologically sort the vertices ofG
2I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/
3foreach vertexu, taken in topologically sorted order
4foreach vertex2G:AdjŒu
5R
ELAX.u;;w/
Figure 24.5 shows the execution of this algorithm.
The running time of this algorithm is easy to analyze. As shown in Section 22.4,
the  topological  sort  of  line  1  takes‚.VCE/time.   The  call  of  I
NITIALIZE-
S
INGLE-SOURCEin line 2 takes‚.V /time. Theforloop of lines 3–5 makes one
iteration per vertex. Altogether, theforloop of lines 4–5 relaxes each edge exactly
once.  (We have used an aggregate analysis here.)  Because each iteration of the
innerforloop takes‚.1/time, the total running time is‚.VCE/, which is linear
in the size of an adjacency-list representation of the graph.
The following theorem shows that the D
AG-SHORTEST-PAT H Sprocedure cor-
rectly computes the shortest paths.

656Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
2
∞∞0
5
16
34
∞∞∞
7–1–2
2
(a)
xtsryz
25
16
34
7–1–2
2
(c)
xtsryz
25
16
34
7–1–2
2
(e)
xtsryz
25
16
34
7–1–2
2
(g)
xtsryz
2
5
16
34
7–1–2
2
(b)
xtsryz
25
16
34
7–1–2
2
(d)
xtsryz
25
16
34
7–1–2
2
(f)
xtsryz
∞0∞∞26
∞02654
∞02653
∞02653
∞02664
∞∞0∞∞∞
Figure 24.5The execution  of the algorithm  for shortest  paths in a  directed acyclic  graph.   The
vertices  are topologically sorted from left to right.   The source  vertex iss.Thedvalues  appear
within the vertices, and shaded edges indicate thevalues.(a)The situation before the first iteration
of theforloop of lines 3–5.(b)–(g)The situation after each iteration of theforloop of lines 3–5.
The newly blackened vertex in each iteration was used asuin that iteration.  The values shown in
part (g) are the final values.
Theorem 24.5
If a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/has source vertexsand no cycles, then
at the termination of the D
AG-SHORTEST-PAT H Sprocedure,:dDı.s; /for all
vertices2V, and the predecessor subgraphG

is a shortest-paths tree.
ProofWe  first  show  that:dDı.s; /for  all  vertices2Vat  termina-
tion.   Ifis  not  reachable  froms,then:dDı.s; /D1by  the  no-path
property.    Now,  suppose  thatis  reachable  froms,  so  that  there  is  a  short-
est  pathpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
0
Dsand
k
D.   Because  we  pro-

24.2Single-source shortest paths in directed acyclic graphs657
cess  the  vertices  in  topologically  sorted  order,  we  relax  the  edges  onpin  the
order.
0
;
1
/; .
1
;
2
/;:::;.
k1
;
k
/.   The path-relaxation  property  implies that

i
:dDı.s; 
i
/at  termination  foriD0; 1; : : : ; k.   Finally,  by  the  predecessor-
subgraph property,G

is a shortest-paths tree.
An interesting application of this algorithm arises in determining critical paths
inPERT chart
2
analysis.  Edges represent jobs to be performed, and edge weights
represent the times required to perform particular jobs.  If edge.u; /enters ver-
texand edge.; x/leaves, then job.u; /must be performed before job.; x/.
A path through this dag represents a sequence of jobs that must be performed in a
particular order.  Acritical pathis alongestpath through the dag, corresponding
to the longest time to perform any sequence of jobs.  Thus, the weight of a critical
path provides a lower bound on the total time to perform all the jobs.  We can find
a critical path by either

negating the edge weights and running DAG-SHORTEST-PAT H S,or

running  DAG-SHORTEST-PAT H S,  with the modification that we replace “1”
by “1” in line 2 of  I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCEand “>”by“<”inthe
R
ELAXprocedure.
Exercises
24.2-1
Run D
AG-SHORTEST-PAT H Son the directed graph of Figure 24.5, using vertexr
as the source.
24.2-2
Suppose we change line 3 of D
AG-SHORTEST-PAT H Sto read
3forthe first
j
V
j
1vertices, taken in topologically sorted order
Show that the procedure would remain correct.
24.2-3
The PERT chart formulation given above is somewhat unnatural.  In a more natu-
ral structure, vertices would represent jobs and edges would represent sequencing
constraints; that is, edge.u; /would indicate that jobumust be performed before
job.  We would then assign  weights to vertices,  not  edges.   Modify the  D
AG-
S
HORTEST-PAT H Sprocedure  so that it finds a longest path in a directed acyclic
graph with weighted vertices in linear time.
2
“PERT” is an acronym for “program evaluation and review technique.”

658Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
24.2-4
Give an efficient algorithm to count the total number of paths in a directed acyclic
graph. Analyze your algorithm.
24.3  Dijkstra’s algorithm
Dijkstra’s algorithm solves the single-source shortest-paths problem on a weighted,
directed graphGD.V; E/for the case in which all edge weights are nonnegative.
In this section, therefore, we assume thatw.u; /0for each edge.u; /2E.As
we shall see, with a good implementation, the running time of Dijkstra’s algorithm
is lower than that of the Bellman-Ford algorithm.
Dijkstra’s  algorithm  maintains  a  setSof  vertices  whose  final  shortest-path
weights from the sourceshave already been determined.  The algorithm repeat-
edly selects the vertexu2VSwith the minimum shortest-path estimate, addsu
toS, and relaxes all edges leavingu.  In the following implementation, we use a
min-priority queueQof vertices, keyed by theirdvalues.
D
IJKSTRA.G;w;s/
1I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/
2SD;
3QDG:V
4whileQ¤;
5uDE
XTRACT-MIN.Q/
6SDS[
f
u
g
7foreach vertex2G:AdjŒu
8R
ELAX.u;;w/
Dijkstra’s algorithm relaxes edges as shown in Figure 24.6.  Line 1 initializes
thedandvalues in the usual way, and line 2 initializes the setSto the empty
set.  The algorithm maintains the invariant thatQDVSat the start of each
iteration of thewhileloop of lines 4–8. Line 3 initializes the min-priority queueQ
to contain all the vertices inV;sinceSD;at that time, the invariant is true after
line 3. Each time through thewhileloop of lines 4–8, line 5 extracts a vertexufrom
QDVSand line 6 adds it to setS, thereby maintaining the invariant. (The first
time through this loop,uDs.)  Vertexu, therefore, has the smallest shortest-path
estimate of any vertex inVS. Then, lines 7–8 relax each edge.u; /leavingu,
thus  updating  the  estimate:dand  the  predecessor:if  we  can  improve  the
shortest  path tofound  so far by going  throughu.   Observe that the algorithm
never inserts vertices intoQafter line 3 and that each vertex is extracted fromQ

24.3Dijkstra’s algorithm659
0
∞∞
∞∞
0
∞
∞
1
2
10
5
(c)
10
5
0
8
5
14
7
0
8
5
13
7
0
8
5
9
7
0
5
9
7
8
6432
9
7
s
tx
yz
1
2
10
5
(f)
6432
9
7
s
tx
yz
1
2
10
5
(b)
6432
9
7
s
tx
yz
1
2
10
5
(e)
6432
9
7
s
tx
yz
1
2
10
5
(a)
6432
9
7
s
tx
yz
1
2
10
5
(d)
6432
9
7
s
tx
yz
Figure 24.6The  execution  of  Dijkstra’s  algorithm.   The  sourcesis  the  leftmost  vertex.   The
shortest-path  estimates  appear  within the vertices,  and  shaded  edges  indicate  predecessor  values.
Black vertices are in the setS, and white vertices are in the min-priority queueQDVS.(a)The
situation just before the first iteration of thewhileloop of lines 4–8. The shaded vertex has the mini-
mumdvalue and is chosen as vertexuin line 5.(b)–(f)The situation after each successive iteration
of thewhileloop. The shaded vertex in each part is chosen as vertexuin line 5 of the next iteration.
Thedvalues and predecessors shown in part (f) are the final values.
and added toSexactly once, so that thewhileloop of lines 4–8 iterates exactly
j
V
j
times.
Because Dijkstra’s algorithm always chooses the “lightest” or “closest” vertex
inVSto add to setS, we say that it uses a greedy strategy. Chapter 16 explains
greedy strategies in detail, but you need not have read that chapter to understand
Dijkstra’s algorithm. Greedy strategies do not always yield optimal results in gen-
eral, but as the following theorem and its corollary show, Dijkstra’s algorithm does
indeed compute shortest paths. The key is to show that each time it adds a vertexu
to setS,wehaveu:dDı.s; u/.
Theorem 24.6 (Correctness of Dijkstra’s algorithm)
Dijkstra’s  algorithm,  run  on a weighted,  directed  graphGD.V; E/with non-
negative weight functionwand sources,  terminates  withu:dDı.s; u/for all
verticesu2V.

660Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
p
1
S
p
2
u
y
s
x
Figure 24.7The proof of Theorem 24.6. SetSis nonempty just before vertexuis added to it. We
decompose a shortest pathpfrom sourcesto vertexuintos
p
1
x!y
p
2
u,whereyis the first
vertex on the path that is not inSandx2Simmediately precedesy. Verticesxandyare distinct,
but we may havesDxoryDu.Pathp
2
may or may not reenter setS.
ProofWe use the following loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of thewhileloop of lines 4–8,:dDı.s; /
for each vertex2S.
It suffices to show for each vertexu2V,wehaveu:dDı.s; u/at the time whenu
is added to setS.  Once we show thatu:dDı.s; u/, we rely on the upper-bound
property to show that the equality holds at all times thereafter.
Initialization:Initially,SD;, and so the invariant is trivially true.
Maintenance:We wish to show that in each iteration,u:dDı.s; u/for the vertex
added to setS.  For the purpose of contradiction,  letube the first vertex for
whichu:d¤ı.s; u/when it is added to setS.  We shall focus our attention
on the situation at the beginning of the iteration of thewhileloop in whichu
is added toSand derive the contradiction  thatu:dDı.s; u/at that time by
examining a shortest path fromstou.Wemusthaveu¤sbecausesis the
first vertex added to setSands:dDı.s; s/D0at that time.  Becauseu¤s,
we also have thatS¤;just beforeu
is added  toS.   There must be some
path fromstou, for otherwiseu:dDı.s; u/D1by the no-path property,
which would violate our assumption thatu:d¤ı.s; u/.  Because there is at
least one path, there is a shortest pathpfromstou.  Prior to addingutoS,
pathpconnects a vertex inS, namelys, to a vertex inVS, namelyu.Letus
consider the first vertexyalongpsuch thaty2VS,andletx2Sbey’s
predecessor alongp. Thus, as Figure 24.7 illustrates, we can decompose pathp
intos
p
1
x!y
p
2
u. (Either of pathsp
1
orp
2
mayhavenoedges.)
We claim thaty:dDı.s; y/whenuis added toS.  To prove this claim, ob-
serve  thatx2S.   Then,  because  we  choseuas  the  first  vertex  for  which
u:d¤ı.s; u/when it is added toS,wehadx:dDı.s; x/whenxwas added

24.3Dijkstra’s algorithm661
toS.   Edge.x; y/was  relaxed  at  that  time,  and  the  claim  follows  from  the
convergence property.
We can now obtain  a contradiction  to prove thatu:dDı.s; u/.   Becausey
appears beforeuon a shortest path fromstouand all edge weights are non-
negative (notably those on pathp
2
), we haveı.s; y/ı.s; u/, and thus
y:dDı.s; y/
ı.s; u/(24.2)
u:d(by the upper-bound property)  .
But because both verticesuandywere inVSwhenuwas chosen in line 5,
we haveu:dy:d.  Thus, the two inequalities in (24.2) are in fact equalities,
giving
y:dDı.s; y/Dı.s; u/Du:d:
Consequently,u:dDı.s; u/, which contradicts our choice ofu.  We conclude
thatu:dDı.s; u/whenuis added toS, and that this equality is maintained at
all times thereafter.
Termination:At termination,QD;which, along with our earlier invariant that
QDVS, implies thatSDV. Thus,u:dDı.s; u/for all verticesu2V.
Corollary 24.7
If we run Dijkstra’s  algorithm  on a weighted,  directed  graphGD.V; E/with
nonnegative weight functionwand sources, then at termination, the predecessor
subgraphG

is a shortest-paths tree rooted ats.
ProofImmediate from Theorem 24.6 and the predecessor-subgraph property.
Analysis
How fast is Dijkstra’s algorithm?  It maintains the min-priority queueQby call-
ing three priority-queue  operations:  I
NSERT(implicit in line 3),  EXTRACT-MIN
(line 5), and DECREASE-KEY(implicit in RELAX, which is called in line 8). The
algorithm calls both I
NSERTand EXTRACT-MINonce per vertex.  Because each
vertexu2Vis added to setSexactly once, each edge in the adjacency listAdjŒu
is examined in theforloop of lines 7–8 exactly once during the course of the al-
gorithm.  Since the total number of edges in all the adjacency lists is
j
E
j
,thisfor
loop iterates a total of
j
E
j
times, and thus the algorithm calls D
ECREASE-KEYat
most
j
E
j
times overall. (Observe once again that we are using aggregate analysis.)
The  running  time  of  Dijkstra’s  algorithm  depends  on  how  we  implement  the
min-priority queue.  Consider first the case in which we maintain the min-priority

662Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
queue by taking advantage of the vertices being numbered 1 to
j
V
j
.Wesimply
store:din theth entry of an array. Each I
NSERTand DECREASE-KEYoperation
takesO.1/time, and each E
XTRACT-MINoperation takesO.V /time(sincewe
have to search through the entire array), for a total time ofO.V
2
CE/DO.V
2
/.
If  the  graph  is  sufficiently  sparse—in  particular,EDo.V
2
=lgV/—we  can
improve the algorithm by implementing the min-priority queue with a binary min-
heap.   (As  discussed  in  Section  6.5,  the  implementation  should  make  sure  that
vertices and corresponding heap elements maintain handles to each other.)  Each
E
XTRACT-MINoperation then takes timeO.lgV/.  As before, there are
j
V
j
such
operations. The time to build the binary min-heap isO.V /. Each D
ECREASE-KEY
operation takes timeO.lgV/, and there are still at most
j
E
j
such operations.  The
total running time is thereforeO..VCE/lgV/,whichisO.ElgV/if all vertices
are reachable from the source.  This running time improves upon the straightfor-
wardO.V
2
/-time implementation ifEDo.V
2
=lgV/.
We can in fact achieve a running time ofO.VlgVCE/by implementing the
min-priority  queue with a Fibonacci heap (see Chapter 19).  The amortized cost
of each of the
j
V
j
E
XTRACT-MINoperations  isO.lgV/, and each DECREASE-
K
EYcall, of which there are at most
j
E
j
, takes onlyO.1/amortized time.  His-
torically,  the development  of Fibonacci  heaps  was motivated by the observation
that Dijkstra’s algorithm typically makes many more D
ECREASE-KEYcalls than
E
XTRACT-MINcalls, so that any method of reducing the amortized time of each
D
ECREASE-KEYoperation  too.lgV/without  increasing  the amortized  time of
E
XTRACT-MINwould yield an asymptotically faster implementation than with bi-
nary heaps.
Dijkstra’s algorithm resembles both breadth-first search (see Section 22.2) and
Prim’s algorithm for computing minimum spanning trees (see Section 23.2).  It is
like breadth-first search in that setScorresponds to the set of black vertices in a
breadth-first search; just as vertices inShave their final shortest-path weights, so
do black vertices in a breadth-first search have their correct breadth-first distances.
Dijkstra’s  algorithm  is like  Prim’s algorithm  in  that  both  algorithms  use a min-
priority queue to find the “lightest” vertex outside a given set (the setSin Dijkstra’s
algorithm and the tree being grown in Prim’s algorithm), add this vertex into the
set, and adjust the weights of the remaining vertices outside the set accordingly.
Exercises
24.3-1
Run Dijkstra’s algorithm on the directed graph of Figure 24.2, first using vertexs
as the source and then using vertex ́as the source.  In the style of Figure 24.6,
show thedandvalues and the vertices in setSafter each iteration of thewhile
loop.

24.3Dijkstra’s algorithm663
24.3-2
Give a simple example of a directed graph with negative-weight edges for which
Dijkstra’s algorithm produces incorrect answers.  Why doesn’t the proof of Theo-
rem 24.6 go through when negative-weight edges are allowed?
24.3-3
Suppose we change line 4 of Dijkstra’s algorithm to the following.
4while
j
Q
j
>1
This change causes thewhileloop to execute
j
V
j
1times instead of
j
V
j
times. Is
this proposed algorithm correct?
24.3-4
Professor Gaedel has written a program that he claims implements Dijkstra’s al-
gorithm.   The program  produces:dand:for each  vertex2V.Givean
O.VCE/-time algorithm to check the output of the professor’s program. It should
determine whether thedandattributes match those of some shortest-paths tree.
You may assume that all edge weights are nonnegative.
24.3-5
Professor Newman thinks that he has worked out a simpler proof of correctness
for Dijkstra’s algorithm.  He claims that Dijkstra’s algorithm relaxes the edges of
every shortest path in the graph in the order in which they appear on the path, and
therefore the path-relaxation  property applies to every vertex reachable from the
source.  Show that the professor is mistaken by constructing a directed graph for
which Dijkstra’s algorithm could relax the edges of a shortest path out of order.
24.3-6
We are given a directed graphGD.V; E/on which each edge.u; /2Ehas an
associated valuer.u;/, which is a real number in the range0r.u;/1that
represents the reliability of a communication channel from vertexuto vertex.
We interpretr.u;/as the probability that the channel fromutowill not fail,
and we assume that these probabilities are independent. Give an efficient algorithm
to find the most reliable path between two given vertices.
24.3-7
LetGD.V; E/be  a  weighted,  directed  graph  with  positive  weight  function
wWE!
f
1;2;:::;W
g
for some positive integerW, and assume that no two ver-
tices have the same shortest-path weights from source vertexs. Now suppose that
we define an unweighted,  directed graphG
0
D.V[V
0
;E
0
/by replacing  each
edge.u; /2Ewithw.u; /unit-weight  edges  in  series.   How  many  vertices
doesG
0
have?  Now suppose that we run a breadth-first search onG
0
.  Show that

664Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
the order in which the breadth-first search ofG
0
colors vertices inVblack is the
same as the order in which Dijkstra’s algorithm extracts the vertices ofVfrom the
priority queue when it runs onG.
24.3-8
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with nonnegative weight function
wWE!
f
0; 1; : : : ; W
g
for some nonnegative integerW. Modify Dijkstra’s algo-
rithm to compute the shortest paths from a given source vertexsinO.W VCE/
time.
24.3-9
Modify  your  algorithm  from  Exercise  24.3-8  to run  inO..VCE/lgW/time.
(Hint:How many distinct  shortest-path  estimates  can there  be inVSat  any
point in time?)
24.3-10
Suppose that we are given a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/in which edges
that leave the source vertexsmay have negative weights, all other edge weights
are nonnegative,  and there  are no negative-weight  cycles.   Argue that  Dijkstra’s
algorithm correctly finds shortest paths fromsin this graph.
24.4  Difference constraints and shortest paths
Chapter 29 studies the general linear-programming problem, in which we wish to
optimize a linear function subject to a set of linear inequalities.  In this section, we
investigate a special case of linear programming that we reduce to finding shortest
paths  from  a  single  source.   We can  then  solve  the  single-source  shortest-paths
problem that results by running the Bellman-Ford algorithm, thereby also solving
the linear-programming problem.
Linear programming
In the generallinear-programming problem,wearegivenanm	nmatrixA,
anm-vectorb,andann-vectorc. Wewishtofindavectorxofnelements that
maximizes theobjective function
P
n
iD1
c
i
x
i
subject to themconstraints given by
Axb.
Although  the  simplex  algorithm,  which  is  the  focus  of  Chapter  29,  does  not
always  run  in  time  polynomial  in  the  size  of  its  input,  there  are  other  linear-
programming algorithms that do run in polynomial time. We offer here two reasons
to understand the setup of linear-programming problems. First, if we know that we

24.4Difference constraints and shortest paths665
can cast a given problem as a polynomial-sized linear-programming problem, then
we immediately have a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the problem.  Second,
faster algorithms exist for many special cases of linear programming.  For exam-
ple, the single-pair shortest-path problem (Exercise 24.4-4) and the maximum-flow
problem (Exercise 26.1-5) are special cases of linear programming.
Sometimes we don’t really care about the objective function; we just wish to find
anyfeasible solution, that is, any vectorxthat satisfiesAxb, or to determine
that no feasible solution exists. We shall focus on one suchfeasibility problem.
Systems of difference constraints
In asystem of difference constraints, each row of the linear-programming matrixA
contains one1and one1, and all other entries ofAare0.  Thus, the constraints
given byAxbare a set ofmdifference constraintsinvolvingnunknowns, in
which each constraint is a simple linear inequality of the form
x
j
x
i
b
k
;
where1i; jn,i¤j,and1km.
For example, consider the problem of finding a5-vectorxD.x
i
/that satisfies

11000
10001
01001
10100
10010
00110
00101
00011
 ̆
ˇ
x
1
x
2
x
3
x
4
x
5



0
1
1
5
4
1
3
3
 ̆
:
This problem  is equivalent  to finding values for the unknownsx
1
;x
2
;x
3
;x
4
;x
5
,
satisfying the following8difference constraints:
x
1
x
2
0,(24.3)
x
1
x
5
1,(24.4)
x
2
x
5
1,(24.5)
x
3
x
1
5,(24.6)
x
4
x
1
4,(24.7)
x
4
x
3
1,(24.8)
x
5
x
3
3,(24.9)
x
5
x
4
3.(24.10)

666Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
One solution to this problem isxD.5;3; 0;1;4/, which you can verify di-
rectly by checking each inequality. In fact, this problem has more than one solution.
Another isx
0
D.0;2;5;4;1/.  These two solutions are related:  each component
ofx
0
is5larger  than  the corresponding  component  ofx.   This fact  is not mere
coincidence.
Lemma 24.8
LetxD.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/be a solution  to a systemAxbof  difference  con-
straints, and letdbe any constant.  ThenxCdD.x
1
Cd; x
2
Cd;:::;x
n
Cd/
is a solution toAxbas well.
ProofFor eachx
i
andx
j
,wehave.x
j
Cd/.x
i
Cd/Dx
j
x
i
.  Thus, ifx
satisfiesAxb, so doesxCd.
Systems of difference constraints occur in many different applications.  For ex-
ample, the unknownsx
i
may be times at which events are to occur. Each constraint
states that at least a certain amount of time, or at most a certain amount of time,
must elapse between two events. Perhaps the events are jobs to be performed dur-
ing the assembly of a product.  If we apply an adhesive that takes 2 hours to set at
timex
1
and we have to wait until it sets to install a part at timex
2
, then we have the
constraint thatx
2
x
1
C2or, equivalently, thatx
1
x
2
2. Alternatively, we
might require that the part be installed after the adhesive has been applied but no
later than the time that the adhesive has set halfway. In this case, we get the pair of
constraintsx
2
x
1
andx
2
x
1
C1or, equivalently,x
1
x
2
0andx
2
x
1
1.
Constraint graphs
We  can  interpret  systems  of  difference  constraints  from  a  graph-theoretic  point
of  view.   In  a  systemAxbof  difference  constraints,  we  view  them	n
linear-programming  matrixAas the transpose of an incidence matrix (see Exer-
cise 22.1-7) for a graph withnvertices andmedges.  Each vertex
i
in the graph,
foriD1;2;:::;n, corresponds to one of thenunknown variablesx
i
.  Each di-
rected edge in the graph corresponds  to one of theminequalities  involving  two
unknowns.
More formally, given a systemAxbof difference constraints, the correspond-
ingconstraint graphis a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/,where
VD
f

0
;
1
;:::;
n
g
and
ED
f
.
i
;
j
/Wx
j
x
i
b
k
is a constraint
g
[
f
.
0
;
1
/; .
0
;
2
/; .
0
;
3
/;:::;.
0
;
n
/
g
:

24.4Difference constraints and shortest paths667
0
0
0
0
0
0–1
1
5
4
–1
–3
–3
0
–5
–3
0–1
–4
v
3
v
2
v
1
v
5
v
0
v
4
Figure 24.8The constraint graph corresponding to the system (24.3)–(24.10) of difference con-
straints.  The value ofı.
0
;
i
/appears in each vertex
i
.  One feasible solution to the system is
xD.5;3; 0;1;4/.
The constraint graph contains the additional vertex
0
, as we shall see shortly, to
guarantee that the graph has some vertex which can reach all other vertices. Thus,
the vertex setVconsists of a vertex
i
for each unknownx
i
, plus an additional
vertex
0
.  The edge setEcontains  an edge for each difference  constraint,  plus
an edge.
0
;
i
/for each unknownx
i
.Ifx
j
x
i
b
k
is a difference constraint,
then the weight of edge.
i
;
j
/isw.
i
;
j
/Db
k
.  The weight of each edge leav-
ing
0
is0.  Figure 24.8 shows the constraint graph for the system (24.3)–(24.10)
of difference constraints.
The following theorem shows that we can find a solution to a system of differ-
ence constraints by finding shortest-path  weights in the corresponding  constraint
graph.
Theorem 24.9
Given a systemAxbof difference constraints,  letGD.V; E/be the corre-
sponding constraint graph. IfGcontains no negative-weight cycles, then
xD.ı.
0
;
1
/; ı.
0
;
2
/; ı.
0
;
3
/;:::;ı.
0
;
n
//(24.11)
is a feasible solution for the system.  IfGcontains a negative-weight cycle, then
there is no feasible solution for the system.
ProofWe  first  show  that  if  the  constraint  graph  contains  no  negative-weight
cycles,  then  equation  (24.11)  gives  a  feasible  solution.Consider  any  edge
.
i
;
j
/2E.  By  the  triangle  inequality,ı.
0
;
j
/ı.
0
;
i
/Cw.
i
;
j
/or,
equivalently,ı.
0
;
j
/ı.
0
;
i
/w.
i
;
j
/.   Thus,  lettingx
i
Dı.
0
;
i
/and

668Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
x
j
Dı.
0
;
j
/satisfies the difference constraintx
j
x
i
w.
i
;
j
/that corre-
sponds to edge.
i
;
j
/.
Now we show that if the constraint graph contains a negative-weight cycle, then
the system of difference constraints has no feasible solution.  Without loss of gen-
erality,  let the negative-weight  cycle becDh
1
;
2
; :::; 
k
i,where
1
D
k
.
(The vertex
0
cannot be on cyclec, because it has no entering edges.)  Cyclec
corresponds to the following difference constraints:
x
2
x
1
w.
1
;
2
/;
x
3
x
2
w.
2
;
3
/;
:
:
:
x
k1
x
k2
w.
k2
;
k1
/;
x
k
x
k1
w.
k1
;
k
/:
We will assume thatxhas a solution satisfying each of thesekinequalities and then
derive a contradiction.   The solution  must also satisfy  the inequality  that results
when  we  sum  thekinequalities  together.   If  we  sum  the  left-hand  sides,  each
unknownx
i
is added  in once  and subtracted  out  once (remember  that
1
D
k
impliesx
1
Dx
k
), so that the left-hand side of the sum is0.  The right-hand side
sums tow.c/, and thus we obtain0w.c/. But sincecis a negative-weight cycle,
w.c/ < 0, and we obtain the contradiction that0w.c/ < 0.
Solving systems of difference constraints
Theorem  24.9  tells  us  that  we  can  use  the  Bellman-Ford  algorithm  to  solve  a
system  of  difference  constraints.    Because  the  constraint  graph  contains  edges
from the source vertex
0
to all other vertices,  any negative-weight  cycle in the
constraint  graph  is  reachable  from
0
.    If  the  Bellman-Ford  algorithm  returns
TRUE,  then  the  shortest-path  weights  give  a feasible  solution  to  the  system.   In
Figure 24.8, for example,  the shortest-path  weights provide the feasible solution
xD.5;3; 0;1;4/, and by Lemma 24.8,xD.d5; d3; d; d1; d4/
is also a feasible solution for any constantd. If the Bellman-Ford algorithm returns
FALSE, there is no feasible solution to the system of difference constraints.
A system of difference constraints withmconstraints onnunknowns produces
a  graph  withnC1vertices  andnCmedges.   Thus,  using  the  Bellman-Ford
algorithm, we can solve the system inO..nC1/.nCm//DO.n
2
Cnm/time.
Exercise 24.4-5 asks you to modify the algorithm to run inO.nm/time, even ifm
is much less thann.

24.4Difference constraints and shortest paths669
Exercises
24.4-1
Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists for the follow-
ing system of difference constraints:
x
1
x
2
1,
x
1
x
4
4,
x
2
x
3
2,
x
2
x
5
7,
x
2
x
6
5,
x
3
x
6
10,
x
4
x
2
2,
x
5
x
1
1,
x
5
x
4
3,
x
6
x
3
8.
24.4-2
Find a feasible solution or determine that no feasible solution exists for the follow-
ing system of difference constraints:
x
1
x
2
4,
x
1
x
5
5,
x
2
x
4
6,
x
3
x
2
1,
x
4
x
1
3,
x
4
x
3
5,
x
4
x
5
10,
x
5
x
3
4,
x
5
x
4
8.
24.4-3
Can any shortest-path weight from the new vertex
0
in a constraint graph be posi-
tive? Explain.
24.4-4
Express the single-pair shortest-path problem as a linear program.

670Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
24.4-5
Show how to modify the Bellman-Ford algorithm slightly so that when we use it
to solve a system of difference constraints withminequalities onnunknowns, the
running time isO.nm/.
24.4-6
Suppose that in addition to a system of difference constraints, we want to handle
equality constraintsof the formx
i
Dx
j
Cb
k
.  Show how to adapt the Bellman-
Ford algorithm to solve this variety of constraint system.
24.4-7
Show how to solve a system of difference constraints by a Bellman-Ford-like algo-
rithm that runs on a constraint graph without the extra vertex
0
.
24.4-8?
LetAxbbeasystemofmdifference constraints innunknowns. Show that the
Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the corresponding constraint graph, maxi-
mizes
P
n
iD1
x
i
subject toAxbandx
i
0for allx
i
.
24.4-9?
Show that the Bellman-Ford algorithm, when run on the constraint graph for a sys-
temAxbof difference constraints, minimizes the quantity.max
f
x
i
g
min
f
x
i
g
/
subject toAxb.  Explain how this fact might come in handy if the algorithm is
used to schedule construction jobs.
24.4-10
Suppose that every row in the matrixAof a linear programAxbcorresponds to
a difference constraint, a single-variable constraint of the formx
i
b
k
, or a single-
variable constraint of the formx
i
b
k
.  Show how to adapt the Bellman-Ford
algorithm to solve this variety of constraint system.
24.4-11
Give an efficient  algorithm  to solve  a systemAxbof  difference  constraints
when all of the elements ofbare real-valued and all of the unknownsx
i
must be
integers.
24.4-12?
Give an efficient  algorithm  to solve  a systemAxbof  difference  constraints
when all of the elements ofbare real-valued and a specified subset of some, but
not necessarily all, of the unknownsx
i
must be integers.

24.5Proofs of shortest-paths properties671
24.5  Proofs of shortest-paths properties
Throughout  this  chapter,  our  correctness  arguments  have  relied  on  the  triangle
inequality,  upper-bound  property,  no-path  property,  convergence  property,  path-
relaxation property, and predecessor-subgraph property. We stated these properties
without proof at the beginning of this chapter. In this section, we prove them.
The triangle inequality
In studying breadth-first search (Section 22.2), we proved as Lemma 22.1 a sim-
ple property of shortest  distances  in unweighted graphs.  The triangle inequality
generalizes the property to weighted graphs.
Lemma 24.10 (Triangle inequality)
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R
and source vertexs. Then, for all edges.u; /2E,wehave
ı.s; /ı.s; u/Cw.u; / :
ProofSuppose thatpis a shortest path from sourcesto vertex.Thenphas
no more weight than any other path fromsto.  Specifically, pathphas no more
weight than the particular path that takes a shortest path from sourcesto vertexu
and then takes edge.u; /.
Exercise 24.5-3 asks you to handle the case in which there is no shortest path
fromsto.
Effects of relaxation on shortest-path estimates
The next group of lemmas describes how shortest-path estimates are affected when
we execute  a sequence  of  relaxation  steps  on  the  edges  of  a weighted,  directed
graph that has been initialized by I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.
Lemma 24.11 (Upper-bound property)
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R.
Lets2Vbe the source vertex, and let the graph be initialized by I
NITIALIZE-
S
INGLE-SOURCE.G; s/.  Then,:dı.s; /for all2V, and this invariant is
maintained over any sequence of relaxation steps on the edges ofG.  Moreover,
once:dachieves its lower boundı.s; /, it never changes.

672Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
ProofWe prove the invariant:dı.s; /for all vertices2Vby induction
over the number of relaxation steps.
For the basis,:dı.s; /is certainly true after initialization, since:dD1
implies:dı.s; /for all2V
f
s
g
, and sinces:dD0ı.s; s/(note that
ı.s; s/D1ifsis on a negative-weight cycle and0otherwise).
For the inductive step, consider the relaxation of an edge.u; /. By the inductive
hypothesis,x:dı.s; x/for allx2Vprior to the relaxation.  The onlydvalue
that may change is:d. If it changes, we have
:dDu:dCw.u; /
ı.s; u/Cw.u; /(by the inductive hypothesis)
ı.s; /(by the triangle inequality)  ,
and so the invariant is maintained.
To see that the value of:dnever changes once:dDı.s; /, note that having
achieved its lower bound,:dcannot  decrease  because we have just shown that
:dı.s; /
, and it cannot increase because relaxation steps do not increased
values.
Corollary 24.12 (No-path property)
Suppose  that  in  a  weighted,  directed  graphGD.V; E/with  weight  function
wWE!R, no path connects a source vertexs2Vto a given vertex2V.
Then,  after  the  graph  is  initialized  by  I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/,we
have:dDı.s; /D1,  and  this  equality  is  maintained  as  an  invariant  over
any sequence of relaxation steps on the edges ofG.
ProofBy the upper-bound property,  we always have1Dı.s; /:d,and
thus:dD1Dı.s; /.
Lemma 24.13
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R,
and  let.u; /2E.   Then,  immediately  after  relaxing  edge.u; /by executing
R
ELAX.u;;w/,wehave:du:dCw.u; /.
ProofIf, just prior to relaxing edge.u; /,wehave:d>u:dCw.u; /,then
:dDu:dCw.u; /afterward.   If,  instead,:du:dCw.u; /just before
the  relaxation,  then  neitheru:dnor:dchanges,  and so:du:dCw.u; /
afterward.
Lemma 24.14 (Convergence property)
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R,
lets2Vbe a source  vertex,  and letsu!be a shortest  path inGfor

24.5Proofs of shortest-paths properties673
some verticesu; 2V.  Suppose thatGis initialized  by  INITIALIZE-SINGLE-
S
OURCE.G; s/and  then  a  sequence  of  relaxation  steps  that  includes  the  call
R
ELAX.u;;w/is  executed  on  the  edges  ofG.Ifu:dDı.s; u/at  any  time
prior to the call, then:dDı.s; /at all times after the call.
ProofBy the upper-bound property, ifu:dDı.s; u/at some point prior to re-
laxing edge.u; /, then this equality holds thereafter.  In particular, after relaxing
edge.u; /,wehave
:du:dCw.u; /(by Lemma 24.13)
Dı.s; u/Cw.u; /
Dı.s; /(by Lemma 24.1)  .
By  the  upper-bound  property,:dı.s; /,  from  which  we  conclude  that
:dDı.s; /, and this equality is maintained thereafter.
Lemma 24.15 (Path-relaxation property)
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R,
and lets2Vbe a source vertex. Consider any shortest pathpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i
fromsD
0
to
k
.IfGis initialized by INITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/and
then a sequence of relaxation steps occurs that includes, in order, relaxing the edges
.
0
;
1
/; .
1
;
2
/;:::;.
k1
;
k
/,then
k
:dDı.s; 
k
/after these relaxations and
at all times afterward.  This property holds no matter what other edge relaxations
occur, including relaxations that are intermixed with relaxations of the edges ofp.
ProofWe show by induction that after theith edge of pathpis relaxed, we have

i
:dDı.s; 
i
/. For the basis,iD0, and before any edges ofphave been relaxed,
we have from the initialization that
0
:dDs:dD0Dı.s; s/. By the upper-bound
property, the value ofs:dnever changes after initialization.
For the inductive  step,  we assume  that
i1
:dDı.s; 
i1
/,andweexamine
what happens when we relax edge.
i1
;
i
/.  By the convergence property, after
relaxing this edge, we have
i
:dDı.s; 
i
/, and this equality is maintained at all
times thereafter.
Relaxation and shortest-paths trees
We now show that once a sequence of relaxations has caused the shortest-path es-
timates to converge to shortest-path weights, the predecessor subgraphG

induced
by the resultingvalues is a shortest-paths tree forG.  We start with the follow-
ing lemma, which shows that the predecessor subgraph always forms a rooted tree
whose root is the source.

674Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
Lemma 24.16
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R,
lets2Vbe  a  source  vertex,  and  assume  thatGcontains  no  negative-weight
cycles that are reachable froms. Then, after the graph is initialized by I
NITIALIZE-
S
INGLE-SOURCE.G; s/,  the  predecessor  subgraphG

forms  a  rooted  tree  with
roots, and any sequence of relaxation steps on edges ofGmaintains this property
as an invariant.
ProofInitially, the only vertex inG

is the source vertex, and the lemma is triv-
ially  true.   Consider  a  predecessor  subgraphG

that  arises  after  a  sequence  of
relaxation steps.  We shall first prove thatG

is acyclic.  Suppose for the sake of
contradiction that some relaxation step creates a cycle in the graphG

.Letthecy-
cle becDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
k
D
0
. Then,
i
:D
i1
foriD1;2;:::;k
and, without loss of generality, we can assume that relaxing edge.
k1
;
k
/created
the cycle inG

.
We claim  that all vertices on cyclecare reachable  from the sources.   Why?
Each vertex onchas a non-
NILpredecessor, and so each vertex oncwas assigned
a finite shortest-path estimate when it was assigned its non-
NILvalue.  By the
upper-bound  property,  each  vertex  on  cyclechas  a  finite  shortest-path  weight,
which implies that it is reachable froms.
We  shall  examine  the  shortest-path  estimates  oncjust  prior  to  the  call
R
ELAX.
k1
;
k
;w/and show thatcis a negative-weight cycle,  thereby contra-
dicting the assumption thatGcontains no negative-weight cycles that are reachable
from the source. Just before the call, we have
i
:D
i1
foriD1;2;:::;k1.
Thus,  foriD1;2;:::;k1,  the  last  update  to
i
:dwas  by  the  assignment

i
:dD
i1
:dCw.
i1
;
i
/.If
i1
:dchanged since then, it decreased. Therefore,
just before the call R
ELAX.
k1
;
k
;w/,wehave

i
:d
i1
:dCw.
i1
;
i
/for alliD1;2;:::;k1:(24.12)
Because
k
:is changed  by the call,  immediately  beforehand  we also have the
strict inequality

k
:d>
k1
:dCw.
k1
;
k
/:
Summing this strict inequality with thek1inequalities (24.12), we obtain the
sum of the shortest-path estimates around cyclec:
k
X
iD1

i
:d>
k
X
iD1
.
i1
:dCw.
i1
;
i
//
D
k
X
iD1

i1
:dC
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/:

24.5Proofs of shortest-paths properties675
s
u
x
y
z
v
Figure 24.9Showing that a simple path inG

from sourcesto vertexis unique. If there are two
pathsp
1
(sux! ́)andp
2
(suy! ́), wherex¤y,then ́: Dx
and ́: Dy, a contradiction.
But
k
X
iD1

i
:dD
k
X
iD1

i1
:d;
since  each vertex  in the cyclecappears  exactly  once  in each  summation.   This
equality implies
0>
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/:
Thus, the sum of weights around the cyclecis negative, which provides the desired
contradiction.
We have now proven thatG

is a directed, acyclic graph. To show that it forms
a rooted  tree  with roots,  it  suffices  (see  Exercise  B.5-2)  to  prove  that  for  each
vertex2V

, there is a unique simple path fromstoinG

.
We first must show that a path fromsexists for each vertex inV

.Thever-
tices inV

are those with non-NILvalues, pluss.  The idea here is to prove by
induction that a path exists fromsto all vertices inV

.  We leave the details as
Exercise 24.5-6.
To complete  the  proof  of  the  lemma,  we  must  now  show  that  for  any  vertex
2V

, the graphG

contains at most one simple path fromsto. Suppose other-
wise. That is, suppose that, as Figure 24.9 illustrates,G

contains two simple paths
fromsto some vertex:p
1
,  which we decompose  intosux! ́,
andp
2
, which we decompose intosuy! ́,wherex¤y(thoughu
could besand ́could be).  But then, ́: Dxand ́: Dy, which implies
the contradiction thatxDy.  We conclude thatG

contains a unique simple path
fromsto, and thusG

forms a rooted tree with roots.
We can now show that if, after we have performed a sequence of relaxation steps,
all vertices have been assigned their true shortest-path weights, then the predeces-
sor subgraphG

is a shortest-paths tree.

676Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
Lemma 24.17 (Predecessor-subgraph property)
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R,
lets2Vbe a source vertex, and assume thatGcontains no negative-weight cycles
that are reachable froms. Let us call I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/and then
execute any sequence of relaxation steps on edges ofGthat produces:dDı.s; /
for all2V.  Then, the predecessor subgraphG

is a shortest-paths tree rooted
ats.
ProofWe must prove that the three properties  of shortest-paths  trees given on
page 647 hold forG

.  To show the first property, we must show thatV

is the set
of vertices reachable froms.  By definition, a shortest-path weightı.s; /is finite
if and only ifis reachable froms, and thus the vertices that are reachable froms
are exactly those with finitedvalues. But a vertex2V
f
s
g
has been assigned
a finite value for:dif and only if:¤
NIL. Thus, the vertices inV

are exactly
those reachable froms.
The second property follows directly from Lemma 24.16.
It remains, therefore, to prove the last property of shortest-paths trees: for each
vertex2V

, the unique simple paths
p
inG

is a shortest path fromsto
inG.LetpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
0
Dsand
k
D.ForiD1;2;:::;k,
we have both
i
:dDı.s; 
i
/and
i
:d
i1
:dCw.
i1
;
i
/, from which we
concludew.
i1
;
i
/ı.s; 
i
/ı.s; 
i1
/.  Summing the weights along pathp
yields
w.p/D
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/

k
X
iD1
.ı.s; 
i
/ı.s; 
i1
//
Dı.s; 
k
/ı.s; 
0
/(because the sum telescopes)
Dı.s; 
k
/(becauseı.s; 
0
/Dı.s; s/D0).
Thus,w.p/ı.s; 
k
/.Sinceı.s; 
k
/is a lower bound on the weight of any path
fromsto
k
,  we conclude  thatw.p/Dı.s; 
k
/,  and thuspis a shortest  path
fromstoD
k
.
Exercises
24.5-1
Give two shortest-paths trees for the directed graph of Figure 24.2 (on page 648)
other than the two shown.

24.5Proofs of shortest-paths properties677
24.5-2
Give an example of a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/with weight function
wWE!Rand source vertexssuch thatGsatisfies the following property:  For
every edge.u; /2E, there is a shortest-paths tree rooted atsthat contains.u; /
and another shortest-paths tree rooted atsthat does not contain.u; /.
24.5-3
Embellish  the  proof  of  Lemma  24.10  to  handle  cases  in  which  shortest-path
weights are1or1.
24.5-4
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted,  directed  graph  with source vertexs,andletG
be initialized by I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/.  Prove that if a sequence of
relaxation  steps setss:to a non-
NILvalue,  thenGcontains  a negative-weight
cycle.
24.5-5
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with no negative-weight edges. Let
s2Vbe the source vertex, and suppose that we allow:to be the predecessor
ofonanyshortest path tofrom sourcesif2V
f
s
g
is reachable froms,
and
NILotherwise.  Give an example of such a graphGand an assignment of
values that produces a cycle inG

. (By Lemma 24.16, such an assignment cannot
be produced by a sequence of relaxation steps.)
24.5-6
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted, directed graph with weight functionwWE!R
and no negative-weight cycles. Lets2Vbe the source vertex, and letGbe initial-
ized by I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE.G; s/.  Prove that for every vertex2V

,
there exists a path fromstoinG

and that this property  is maintained  as an
invariant over any sequence of relaxations.
24.5-7
LetGD.V; E/be a weighted,  directed graph that contains no negative-weight
cycles.  Lets2Vbe the source vertex, and letGbe initialized by I
NITIALIZE-
S
INGLE-SOURCE.G; s/.  Prove that there exists a sequence of
j
V
j
1relaxation
steps that produces:dDı.s; /for all2V.
24.5-8
LetGbe an arbitrary weighted, directed graph with a negative-weight cycle reach-
able from the source vertexs. Show how to construct an infinite sequence of relax-
ations of the edges ofGsuch that every relaxation causes a shortest-path estimate
to change.

678Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
Problems
24-1  Yen’s improvement to Bellman-Ford
Suppose that we order the edge relaxations in each pass of the Bellman-Ford al-
gorithm  as  follows.    Before  the  first  pass,  we  assign  an  arbitrary  linear  order

1
;
2
;:::;
jVj
to the vertices  of the input  graphGD.V; E/.   Then,  we parti-
tion  the  edge  setEintoE
f
[E
b
,whereE
f
Df.
i
;
j
/2EWi<jgand
E
b
D
f
.
i
;
j
/2EWi>j
g
. (Assume thatGcontains no self-loops, so that every
edge is in eitherE
f
orE
b
.) DefineG
f
D.V; E
f
/andG
b
D.V; E
b
/.
a.Prove thatG
f
is acyclic with topological sorth
1
;
2
;:::;
jVj
iand thatG
b
is
acyclic with topological sorth
jVj
;
jVj1
;:::;
1
i.
Suppose that we implement each pass of the Bellman-Ford algorithm in the fol-
lowing way. We visit each vertex in the order
1
;
2
;:::;
jVj
, relaxing edges ofE
f
that  leave the vertex.   We then visit  each vertex in the order
jVj
;
jVj1
;:::;
1
,
relaxing edges ofE
b
that leave the vertex.
b.Prove that with this scheme, ifGcontains no negative-weight cycles that are
reachable  from  the  source  vertexs,  then after  only
dj
V
j
=2
e
passes  over  the
edges,:dDı.s; /for all vertices2V.
c.Does this scheme improve the asymptotic  running  time of the Bellman-Ford
algorithm?
24-2  Nesting boxes
Ad-dimensional box with dimensions.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
d
/nestswithin another box
with dimensions.y
1
;y
2
;:::;y
d
/if there exists a permutationon
f
1;2;:::;d
g
such thatx
.1/
<y
1
,x
.2/
<y
2
, ...,x
.d/
<y
d
.
a.Argue that the nesting relation is transitive.
b.Describe an efficient method to determine whether or not oned-dimensional
box nests inside another.
c.Suppose that you are given a set ofnd-dimensional boxes
f
B
1
;B
2
;:::;B
n
g
.
Give an efficient algorithm to find the longest sequencehB
i
1
;B
i
2
;:::;B
i
k
iof
boxes such thatB
i
j
nests withinB
i
jC1
forjD1;2;:::;k1.  Express the
running time of your algorithm in terms ofnandd.

Problems for Chapter 24679
24-3  Arbitrage
Arbitrageis the use of discrepancies in currency exchange rates to transform one
unit  of  a currency  into  more than  one  unit  of  the  same currency.   For example,
suppose that1U.S. dollar buys49Indian rupees,1Indian rupee buys2Japanese
yen, and1Japanese yen buys0:0107U.S. dollars. Then, by converting currencies,
a trader can start with1U.S. dollar and buy49	2	0:0107D1:0486U.S. dollars,
thus turning a profit of4:86percent.
Suppose that we are givenncurrenciesc
1
;c
2
;:::;c
n
and ann	ntableRof
exchange rates, such that one unit of currencyc
i
buysRŒi; j units of currencyc
j
.
a.Give an efficient algorithm to determine whether or not there exists a sequence
of currencieshc
i
1
;c
i
2
;:::;c
i
k
isuch that
RŒi
1
;i
2
RŒi
2
;i
3
RŒi
k1
;i
k
RŒi
k
;i
1
>1:
Analyze the running time of your algorithm.
b.Give an efficient algorithm to print out such a sequence if one exists.  Analyze
the running time of your algorithm.
24-4  Gabow’s scaling algorithm for single-source shortest paths
Ascalingalgorithm  solves  a problem  by  initially  considering  only  the  highest-
order bit of each relevant input value (such as an edge weight).  It then refines the
initial solution by looking at the two highest-order bits.  It progressively looks at
more and more high-order bits, refining the solution each time, until it has exam-
ined all bits and computed the correct solution.
In this problem, we examine an algorithm for computing the shortest paths from
a single source by scaling edge weights. We are given a directed graphGD.V; E/
with nonnegative integer edge weightsw.LetWDmax
.u;/2E
f
w.u; /
g
.Our
goal is to develop an algorithm that runs inO.ElgW/time.  We assume that all
vertices are reachable from the source.
The algorithm uncovers the bits in the binary representation of the edge weights
one at a time, from the most significant bit to the least significant bit. Specifically,
letkD
d
lg.WC1/
e
be the number  of  bits  in the  binary  representation  ofW,
and foriD1;2;:::;k,letw
i
.u; /D

w.u; /=2
ki
 ̆
.Thatis,w
i
.u; /is the
“scaled-down” version ofw.u; /givenbytheimost significant bits ofw.u; /.
(Thus,w
k
.u; /Dw.u; /for  all.u; /2E.)   For  example,  ifkD5and
w.u; /D25,  which  has  the  binary  representationh11001i,thenw
3
.u; /D
h110iD6.  As another example withkD5,ifw.u; /Dh00100iD4,then
w
3
.u; /Dh001iD1.   Let  us  defineı
i
.u; /as  the  shortest-path  weight  from
vertexuto vertexusing weight functionw
i
.  Thus,ı
k
.u; /Dı.u; /for all
u; 2V.  For a given source vertexs, the scaling algorithm  first computes the

680Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
shortest-path weightsı
1
.s; /for all2V, then computesı
2
.s; /for all2V,
and so on, until it computesı
k
.s; /for all2V.  We assume throughout  that
j
E
j

j
V
j
1, and we shall see that computingı
i
fromı
i1
takesO.E/time, so
that the entire algorithm takesO.kE/DO.ElgW/time.
a.Suppose that for all vertices2V,wehaveı.s; /
j
E
j
.  Show that we can
computeı.s; /for all2VinO.E/time.
b.Show that we can computeı
1
.s; /for all2VinO.E/time.
Let us now focus on computingı
i
fromı
i1
.
c.Prove  that  foriD2;3;:::;k,  we  have  eitherw
i
.u; /D2w
i1
.u; /or
w
i
.u; /D2w
i1
.u; /C1. Then, prove that
2ı
i1
.s; /ı
i
.s; /2ı
i1
.s; /C
j
V
j
1
for all2V.
d.Define foriD2;3;:::;kand all.u; /2E,
yw
i
.u; /Dw
i
.u; /C2ı
i1
.s; u/2ı
i1
.s; / :
Prove that foriD2;3;:::;kand allu; 2V, the “reweighted” valueyw
i
.u; /
of edge.u; /is a nonnegative integer.
e.Now, define
y
ı
i
.s; /as the shortest-path weight fromstousing the weight
functionyw
i
. Prove that foriD2;3;:::;kand all2V,
ı
i
.s; /D
y
ı
i
.s; /C2ı
i1
.s; /
and that
y
ı
i
.s; /
j
E
j
.
f.Show how to computeı
i
.s; /fromı
i1
.s; /for all2VinO.E/time, and
conclude that we can computeı.s; /for all2VinO.ElgW/time.
24-5  Karp’s minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm
LetGD.V; E/be a directed graph with weight functionwWE!R,andlet
nD
j
V
j
.Wedefinethemean weightof a cyclecDhe
1
;e
2
;:::;e
k
iof edges inE
to be
.c/D
1
k
k
X
iD1
w.e
i
/:

Problems for Chapter 24681
Let

Dmin
c
.c/,wherecranges over all directed cycles inG. We call a cyclec
for which.c/D

aminimum mean-weight cycle.  This problem investigates
an efficient algorithm for computing

.
Assume without loss of generality that every vertex2Vis reachable from a
source vertexs2V.Letı.s; /be the weight of a shortest path fromsto,andlet
ı
k
.s; /be the weight of a shortest path fromstoconsisting ofexactlykedges.
If there is no path fromstowith exactlykedges, thenı
k
.s; /D1.
a.Show that if

D0,thenGcontains no negative-weight cycles andı.s; /D
min
0kn1
ı
k
.s; /for all vertices2V.
b.Show that if

D0,then
max
0kn1
ı
n
.s; /ı
k
.s; /
nk
0
for all vertices2V.(Hint:Use both properties from part (a).)
c.Letcbe a0-weight cycle, and letuandbe any two vertices onc.  Suppose
that

D0and that the weight of the simple path fromutoalong the cycle
isx.  Prove thatı.s; /Dı.s; u/Cx.(Hint:The weight of the simple path
fromtoualong the cycle isx.)
d.Show that if

D0, then on each minimum mean-weight cycle there exists a
vertexsuch that
max
0kn1
ı
n
.s; /ı
k
.s; /
nk
D0:
(Hint:Show how to extend a shortest path to any vertex on a minimum mean-
weight cycle along the cycle to make a shortest path to the next vertex on the
cycle.)
e.Show that if

D0,then
min
2V
max
0kn1
ı
n
.s; /ı
k
.s; /
nk
D0:
f.Show  that  if  we add a constanttto  the weight  of  each  edge  ofG,then

increases byt. Use this fact to show that


Dmin
2V
max
0kn1
ı
n
.s; /ı
k
.s; /
nk
:
g.Give anO.VE/-time algorithm to compute

.

682Chapter 24Single-Source Shortest Paths
24-6  Bitonic shortest paths
A  sequence  isbitonicif  it  monotonically  increases  and  then  monotonically  de-
creases, or if by a circular shift it monotonically increases and then monotonically
decreases.  For example the sequencesh1; 4; 6; 8; 3;2i,h9; 2;4;10;5i,and
h1; 2; 3; 4iare bitonic, buth1; 3; 12; 4; 2; 10iis not bitonic. (See Problem 15-3 for
the bitonic euclidean traveling-salesman problem.)
Suppose that we are given a directed graphGD.V; E/with weight function
wWE!R, where all edge weights are unique, and we wish to find single-source
shortest paths from a source vertexs.  We are given one additional piece of infor-
mation:  for each vertex2V, the weights of the edges along any shortest path
fromstoform a bitonic sequence.
Give the most efficient algorithm you can to solve this problem, and analyze its
running time.
Chapter notes
Dijkstra’s algorithm [88] appeared in 1959, but it contained no mention of a priority
queue.  The Bellman-Ford algorithm is based on separate algorithms by Bellman
[38] and Ford [109]. Bellman describes the relation of shortest paths to difference
constraints.  Lawler [224] describes the linear-time algorithm for shortest paths in
a dag, which he considers part of the folklore.
When edge weights are relatively small nonnegative integers, we have more ef-
ficient algorithms to solve the single-source shortest-paths problem. The sequence
of values returned by the E
XTRACT-MINcalls in Dijkstra’s algorithm  monoton-
ically  increases  over  time.   As  discussed  in  the  chapter  notes  for  Chapter  6,  in
this case several data structures can implement the various priority-queue  opera-
tions more efficiently than a binary heap or a Fibonacci heap.  Ahuja, Mehlhorn,
Orlin,  and  Tarjan [8] give  an  algorithm  that  runs  inO.ECV
p
lgW/time on
graphs with nonnegative edge weights, whereWis the largest weight of any edge
in the graph.  The best bounds are by Thorup [337], who gives an algorithm that
runs inO.Elg lgV/time, and by Raman [291], who gives an algorithm that runs
inO

ECVmin
 ̊
.lgV/
1=3C
;.lgW/
1=4C


time.  These two algorithms use an
amount  of space that  depends  on the word size of the underlying  machine.   Al-
though the amount of space used can be unbounded in the size of the input, it can
be reduced to be linear in the size of the input using randomized hashing.
For undirected graphs with integer weights, Thorup [336] gives anO.VCE/-
time algorithm for single-source shortest paths. In contrast to the algorithms men-
tioned in the previous paragraph, this algorithm is not an implementation of Dijk-

Notes for Chapter 24683
stra’s  algorithm,  since  the  sequence  of  values  returned  by  EXTRACT-MINcalls
does not monotonically increase over time.
For graphs  with negative  edge  weights,  an  algorithm  due  to  Gabow  and  Tar-
jan  [122]  runs  inO.
p
VElg.V W //time,  and  one  by  Goldberg  [137]  runs  in
O.
p
VElgW/time, whereWDmax
.u;/2E
fj
w.u; /
jg
.
Cherkassky, Goldberg, and Radzik [64] conducted extensive experiments com-
paring various shortest-path algorithms.

25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
In this chapter, we consider the problem of finding shortest paths between all pairs
of vertices in a graph. This problem might arise in making a table of distances be-
tween all pairs of cities for a road atlas. As in Chapter 24, we are given a weighted,
directed graphGD.V; E/with a weight functionwWE!Rthat maps edges
to real-valued  weights.   We wish to find,  for every pair of verticesu; 2V,a
shortest (least-weight) path fromuto, where the weight of a path is the sum of
the weights of its constituent edges.  We typically want the output in tabular form:
the entry inu’s row and’s column should be the weight of a shortest path fromu
to.
We  can  solve  an  all-pairs  shortest-paths  problem  by  running  a  single-source
shortest-paths  algorithm
j
V
j
times,  once  for  each  vertex  as  the  source.    If  all
edge  weights  are  nonnegative,   we  can  use  Dijkstra’s  algorithm.If  we  use
the  linear-array  implementation  of  the  min-priority  queue,  the  running  time  is
O.V
3
CVE/DO.V
3
/. The binary min-heap implementation of the min-priority
queue yields a running time ofO.VElgV/, which is an improvement if the graph
is sparse. Alternatively, we can implement the min-priority queue with a Fibonacci
heap, yielding a running time ofO.V
2
lgVCVE/.
If the graph has negative-weight edges, we cannot use Dijkstra’s algorithm.  In-
stead, we must run the slower Bellman-Ford algorithm once from each vertex. The
resulting running time isO.V
2
E/, which on a dense graph isO.V
4
/. In this chap-
ter we shall see how to do better.  We also investigate the relation of the all-pairs
shortest-paths problem to matrix multiplication and study its algebraic structure.
Unlike the single-source algorithms, which assume an adjacency-list represen-
tation  of  the  graph,  most  of  the  algorithms  in  this  chapter  use  an  adjacency-
matrix  representation.   (Johnson’s  algorithm  for  sparse  graphs,  in  Section  25.3,
uses adjacency lists.)  For convenience, we assume that the vertices are numbered
1;2;:::;
j
V
j
, so that the input is ann	nmatrixWrepresenting the edge weights
of ann-vertex directed graphGD.V; E/.Thatis,WD.w
ij
/,where

Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths685
w
ij
D

0ifiDj;
the weight of directed edge.i; j /ifi¤jand.i; j /2E;
1ifi¤jand.i; j /62E:
(25.1)
We allow negative-weight edges, but we assume for the time being that the input
graph contains no negative-weight cycles.
The tabular  output  of  the  all-pairs  shortest-paths  algorithms  presented  in  this
chapter is ann	nmatrixDD.d
ij
/, where entryd
ij
contains the weight of a
shortest path from vertexito vertexj. That is, if we letı.i; j /denote the shortest-
path weight from vertexito vertexj(as in Chapter  24),  thend
ij
Dı.i; j /at
termination.
To solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on an input adjacency matrix, we
need to compute not only the shortest-path weights but also apredecessor matrix
...D.
ij
/,where
ij
isNILif eitheriDjor  there  is  no  path  fromitoj,
and otherwise
ij
is the predecessor  ofjon some shortest path fromi.Justas
the predecessor subgraphG

from Chapter 24 is a shortest-paths tree for a given
source vertex, the subgraph induced by theith row of the...matrix should be a
shortest-paths tree with rooti.  For each vertexi2V,wedefinethepredecessor
subgraphofGforiasG
;i
D.V
;i
;E
;i
/,where
V
;i
D
f
j2VW
ij
¤NIL
g
[
f
i
g
and
E
;i
D
f
.
ij
;j/Wj2V
;i

f
i
gg
:
IfG
;i
is a shortest-paths tree, then the following procedure, which is a modified
version of the P
RINT-PAT Hprocedure from Chapter 22, prints a shortest path from
vertexito vertexj.
P
RINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H....;i;j/
1ifi
==j
2printi
3elseif
ij
==NIL
4print “no path from”i“to”j“exists”
5elseP
RINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H....;i;
ij
/
6printj
In order to highlight the essential features of the all-pairs algorithms in this chapter,
we won’t cover the creation and properties of predecessor matrices as extensively
as we dealt with predecessor subgraphs in Chapter 24. Some of the exercises cover
the basics.

686Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
Chapter outline
Section 25.1 presents a dynamic-programming  algorithm based on matrix multi-
plication to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem.  Using the technique of “re-
peated squaring,” we can achieve a running time of‚.V
3
lgV/. Section 25.2 gives
another  dynamic-programming  algorithm,  the  Floyd-Warshall  algorithm,  which
runs  in  time‚.V
3
/.   Section  25.2  also  covers  the  problem  of  finding  the  tran-
sitive closure of a directed graph,  which is related to the all-pairs shortest-paths
problem. Finally, Section 25.3 presents Johnson’s algorithm, which solves the all-
pairs shortest-paths problem inO.V
2
lgVCVE/time and is a good choice for
large, sparse graphs.
Before proceeding, we need to establish some conventions for adjacency-matrix
representations.  First, we shall generally assume that the input graphGD.V; E/
hasnvertices, so thatnD
j
V
j
.  Second, we shall use the convention of denoting
matrices by uppercase letters, such asW,L,orD, and their individual elements
by subscripted lowercase letters, such asw
ij
,l
ij
,ord
ij
.  Some matrices will have
parenthesized  superscripts,  as  inL
.m/
D

l
.m/
ij

orD
.m/
D

d
.m/
ij

,  to  indicate
iterates. Finally, for a givenn	nmatrixA, we shall assume that the value ofnis
stored in the attributeA:rows.
25.1  Shortest paths and matrix multiplication
This section presents a dynamic-programming algorithm for the all-pairs shortest-
paths problem on a directed graphGD.V; E/.  Each major loop of the dynamic
program will invoke an operation that is very similar to matrix multiplication, so
that the algorithm will look like repeated matrix multiplication.  We shall start by
developing  a‚.V
4
/-time algorithm  for the all-pairs  shortest-paths  problem  and
then improve its running time to‚.V
3
lgV/.
Before proceeding, let us briefly recap the steps given in Chapter 15 for devel-
oping a dynamic-programming algorithm.
1.   Characterize the structure of an optimal solution.
2.   Recursively define the value of an optimal solution.
3.   Compute the value of an optimal solution in a bottom-up fashion.
We reserve the fourth step—constructing  an optimal solution from computed in-
formation—for the exercises.

25.1Shortest paths and matrix multiplication687
The structure of a shortest path
We start by characterizing  the structure of an optimal solution.  For the all-pairs
shortest-paths  problem  on a graphGD.V; E/,  we have proven (Lemma 24.1)
that all subpaths of a shortest path are shortest paths.  Suppose that we represent
the graph by an adjacency matrixWD.w
ij
/.  Consider a shortest pathpfrom
vertexito vertexj, and suppose thatpcontains at mostmedges.  Assuming that
there are no negative-weight  cycles,mis finite.  IfiDj,thenphas weight0
and  no  edges.   If  verticesiandjare  distinct,  then  we decompose  pathpinto
i
p
0
k!j, where pathp
0
now contains at mostm1edges.  By Lemma 24.1,
p
0
is a shortest path fromitok,andsoı.i; j /Dı.i; k/Cw
kj
.
A recursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem
Now, letl
.m/
ij
be the minimum weight of any path from vertexito vertexjthat
contains at mostmedges.  WhenmD0, there is a shortest path fromitojwith
no edges if and only ifiDj. Thus,
l
.0/
ij
D
(
0ifiDj;
1ifi¤j:
Form1, we computel
.m/
ij
as the minimum ofl
.m1/
ij
(the weight of a shortest
path fromitojconsisting of at mostm1edges) and the minimum weight of any
path fromitojconsisting of at mostmedges, obtained by looking at all possible
predecessorskofj. Thus, we recursively define
l
.m/
ij
Dmin

l
.m1/
ij
;min
1kn
 ̊
l
.m1/
ik
Cw
kj



Dmin
1kn
 ̊
l
.m1/
ik
Cw
kj


:(25.2)
The latter equality follows sincew
jj
D0for allj.
What  are  the  actual  shortest-path  weightsı.i; j /?If  the  graph  contains
no  negative-weight  cycles,  then  for  every  pair  of  verticesiandjfor  which
ı.i; j / <1, there is a shortest path fromitojthat is simple and thus contains at
mostn1edges.  A path from vertexito vertexjwith more thann1edges
cannot have lower weight than a shortest path fromitoj. The actual shortest-path
weights are therefore given by
ı.i; j /Dl
.n1/
ij
Dl
.n/
ij
Dl
.nC1/
ij
D:(25.3)

688Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up
Taking as our input the matrixWD.w
ij
/, we now compute a series of matrices
L
.1/
;L
.2/
;:::;L
.n1/
,  where formD1;2;:::;n1,wehaveL
.m/
D

l
.m/
ij

.
The  final matrixL
.n1/
contains  the  actual  shortest-path  weights.   Observe  that
l
.1/
ij
Dw
ij
for all verticesi; j2V,andsoL
.1/
DW.
The heart  of  the algorithm  is the  following  procedure,  which,  given  matrices
L
.m1/
andW, returns the matrixL
.m/
. That is, it extends the shortest paths com-
puted so far by one more edge.
E
XTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H S.L; W /
1nDL:rows
2letL
0
D

l
0
ij

be a newn	nmatrix
3foriD1ton
4forjD1ton
5l
0
ij
D1
6forkD1ton
7l
0
ij
Dmin.l
0
ij
;l
ik
Cw
kj
/
8returnL
0
The procedure computes a matrixL
0
D.l
0
ij
/, which it returns at the end. It does so
by computing equation (25.2) for alliandj,usingLforL
.m1/
andL
0
forL
.m/
.
(It is written without the superscripts to make its input and output matrices inde-
pendent ofm.) Its running time is‚.n
3
/due to the three nestedforloops.
Now we can see the relation to matrix multiplication. Suppose we wish to com-
pute the matrix productCDABof twon	nmatricesAandB.  Then, for
i; jD1;2;:::;n, we compute
c
ij
D
n
X
kD1
a
ik
b
kj
:(25.4)
Observe that if we make the substitutions
l
.m1/
!a;
w!b;
l
.m/
!c;
min!C;
C!
in equation (25.2), we obtain equation (25.4).  Thus, if we make these changes to
E
XTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H Sand also replace1(the identity for min) by0(the

25.1Shortest paths and matrix multiplication689
identity forC), we obtain the same‚.n
3
/-time procedure for multiplying square
matrices that we saw in Section 4.2:
S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY.A; B/
1nDA:rows
2letCbeanewn	nmatrix
3foriD1ton
4forjD1ton
5c
ij
D0
6forkD1ton
7c
ij
Dc
ij
Ca
ik
b
kj
8returnC
Returning  to  the  all-pairs  shortest-paths  problem,  we compute  the  shortest-path
weights by extending shortest paths edge by edge.  LettingABdenote the ma-
trix “product” returned by E
XTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H S.A; B/, we compute the se-
quence ofn1matrices
L
.1/
DL
.0/
WDW;
L
.2/
DL
.1/
WDW
2
;
L
.3/
DL
.2/
WDW
3
;
:
:
:
L
.n1/
DL
.n2/
WDW
n1
:
As we argued above, the matrixL
.n1/
DW
n1
contains the shortest-path weights.
The following procedure computes this sequence in‚.n
4
/time.
S
LOW-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H S.W /
1nDW:rows
2L
.1/
DW
3formD2ton1
4letL
.m/
beanewn	nmatrix
5L
.m/
DEXTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H S.L
.m1/
;W/
6returnL
.n1/
Figure  25.1  shows  a  graph  and  the  matricesL
.m/
computed  by  the  procedure
S
LOW-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H S.
Improving the running time
Our  goal,  however,  is  not  to  computealltheL
.m/
matrices:   we  are  interested
only in matrixL
.n1/
.  Recall that in the absence of negative-weight cycles, equa-

690Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
2
13
54
34
8
2
6
71
–4–5
L
.1/
D

03 814
10117
14011
21501
11160
 ̆
L
.2/
D

03824
3041   7
140511
21502
8116   0
 ̆
L
.3/
D

03324
30411
740511
21502
85160
 ̆
L
.4/
D

01324
30411
74053
21502
85160
 ̆
Figure 25.1A directed graph and the sequence of matricesL
.m/
computed by SLOW-ALL-PAIRS-
S
HORTEST-PAT H S. You might want to verify thatL
.5/
,definedasL
.4/
W, equalsL
.4/
, and thus
L
.m/
DL
.4/
for allm4.
tion  (25.3)  impliesL
.m/
DL
.n1/
for  all  integersmn1.   Just  as  tradi-
tional matrix multiplication  is associative,  so is matrix multiplication  defined by
the E
XTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H Sprocedure (see Exercise 25.1-4).  Therefore,  we
can computeL
.n1/
with only
d
lg.n1/
e
matrix products by computing the se-
quence
L
.1/
DW;
L
.2/
DW
2
DWW;
L
.4/
DW
4
DW
2
W
2
L
.8/
DW
8
DW
4
W
4
;
:
:
:
L
.2
d
lg.n1/e
/
DW
2
d
lg.n1/e
DW
2
d
lg.n1/e1
W
2
d
lg.n1/e1
:
Since2
dlg.n1/e
n1, the final productL
.2
dlg.n1/e
/
is equal toL
.n1/
.
The following procedure computes the above sequence of matrices by using this
technique ofrepeated squaring.

25.1Shortest paths and matrix multiplication691
12
3
5–12
123
456
–4–8107
Figure 25.2A weighted, directed graph for use in Exercises 25.1-1, 25.2-1, and 25.3-1.
FASTER-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H S.W /
1nDW:rows
2L
.1/
DW
3mD1
4whilem<n1
5letL
.2m/
be a newn	nmatrix
6L
.2m/
DEXTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H S.L
.m/
;L
.m/
/
7mD2m
8returnL
.m/
In each iteration  of thewhileloop of lines 4–7,  we computeL
.2m/
D

L
.m/

2
,
starting  withmD1.At  the  end  of  each  iteration,  we  double  the  value
ofm.  The final iteration computesL
.n1/
by actually computingL
.2m/
for some
n12m < 2n2. By equation (25.3),L
.2m/
DL
.n1/
. The next time the test
in line 4 is performed,mhas been doubled, so nowmn1, the test fails, and
the procedure returns the last matrix it computed.
Because  each of  the
d
lg.n1/
e
matrix products  takes‚.n
3
/time,  FASTER-
A
LL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H Sruns  in‚.n
3
lgn/time.   Observe  that  the  code
is  tight,  containing  no  elaborate  data  structures,  and  the  constant  hidden  in  the
‚-notation is therefore small.
Exercises
25.1-1
Run  S
LOW-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H Son  the  weighted,  directed  graph  of
Figure 25.2, showing the matrices that result for each iteration of the loop.  Then
do the same for F
ASTER-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H S.
25.1-2
Why do we require thatw
ii
D0for all1in?

692Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
25.1-3
What does the matrix
L
.0/
D

01 1  1
101  1
110 1
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
1110

used in the shortest-paths  algorithms correspond  to in regular matrix multiplica-
tion?
25.1-4
Show that matrix multiplication  defined by E
XTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H Sis asso-
ciative.
25.1-5
Show how to express the single-source shortest-paths problem as a product of ma-
trices and a vector. Describe how evaluating this product corresponds to a Bellman-
Ford-like algorithm (see Section 24.1).
25.1-6
Suppose we also wish to compute the vertices on shortest paths in the algorithms of
this section.  Show how to compute the predecessor matrix...from the completed
matrixLof shortest-path weights inO.n
3
/time.
25.1-7
We can also compute the vertices on shortest  paths as we compute the shortest-
path weights. Define
.m/
ij
as the predecessor of vertexjon any minimum-weight
path fromitojthat contains at mostmedges.  Modify the E
XTEND-SHORTEST-
P
AT H Sand SLOW-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H Sprocedures to compute the ma-
trices...
.1/
;...
.2/
;:::;...
.n1/
as the matricesL
.1/
;L
.2/
;:::;L
.n1/
are computed.
25.1-8
The F
ASTER-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H Sprocedure, as written, requires us to
store
d
lg.n1/
e
matrices, each withn
2
elements, for a total space requirement of
‚.n
2
lgn/.  Modify the procedure to require only‚.n
2
/space by using only two
n	nmatrices.
25.1-9
Modify F
ASTER-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H Sso that it can determine whether
the graph contains a negative-weight cycle.

25.2The Floyd-Warshall algorithm693
25.1-10
Give an efficient algorithm  to find the length (number  of edges)  of a minimum-
length negative-weight cycle in a graph.
25.2  The Floyd-Warshall algorithm
In this section, we shall use a different dynamic-programming formulation to solve
the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on a directed graphGD.V; E/.  The result-
ing algorithm, known as theFloyd-Warshall algorithm, runs in‚.V
3
/time.  As
before,  negative-weight  edges  may be  present,  but  we assume  that  there  are  no
negative-weight cycles.  As in Section 25.1, we follow the dynamic-programming
process  to  develop  the  algorithm.    After  studying  the  resulting  algorithm,  we
present a similar method for finding the transitive closure of a directed graph.
The structure of a shortest path
In the Floyd-Warshall algorithm,  we characterize the structure of a shortest path
differently from how we characterized it in Section 25.1. The Floyd-Warshall algo-
rithm considers the intermediate vertices of a shortest path, where anintermediate
vertex of a simple pathpDh
1
;
2
;:::;
l
iis any vertex ofpother than
1
or
l
,
that is, any vertex in the set
f

2
;
3
;:::;
l1
g
.
The Floyd-Warshall  algorithm relies on the following observation.  Under our
assumption that the vertices ofGareVD
f
1;2;:::;n
g
, let us consider a subset
f
1;2;:::;k
g
of vertices for somek. For any pair of verticesi; j2V, consider all
paths fromitojwhose intermediate vertices are all drawn from
f
1;2;:::;k
g
,and
letpbe a minimum-weight path from among them. (Pathpis simple.) The Floyd-
Warshall algorithm exploits a relationship between pathpand shortest paths fromi
tojwith all intermediate  vertices  in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
.   The relationship
depends on whether or notkis an intermediate vertex of pathp.

Ifkis not an intermediate vertex of pathp, then all intermediate  vertices of
pathpare  in  the  set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
.   Thus,  a  shortest  path  from  vertexi
to vertexjwith all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
is also a
shortest path fromitojwith all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
.

Ifkis an intermediate vertex of pathp, then we decomposepintoi
p
1
k
p
2
j,
as Figure 25.3 illustrates.  By Lemma 24.1,p
1
is a shortest path fromitok
with all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
.  In fact, we can make a
slightly stronger statement.  Because vertexkis not an intermediate vertex of
pathp
1
, all intermediate vertices ofp
1
are in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
.There-

694Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
i
k
j
p
1
p
2
p: all intermediate vertices in
f
1;2;:::;k
g
all intermediate vertices in
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
all intermediate vertices in
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
Figure 25.3Pathpis a shortest path from vertexito vertexj,andkis the highest-numbered
intermediate vertex ofp.Pathp
1
, the portion of pathpfrom vertexito vertexk, has all intermediate
vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
. The same holds for pathp
2
from vertexkto vertexj.
fore,p
1
is a shortest path fromitokwith all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
. Similarly,p
2
is a shortest path from vertexkto vertexjwith
all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
.
A recursive solution to the all-pairs shortest-paths problem
Based on the above observations,  we define a recursive formulation  of shortest-
path estimates that differs from the one in Section 25.1.  Letd
.k/
ij
be the weight
of  a  shortest  path  from  vertexito  vertexjfor  which  all  intermediate  vertices
are in the set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
.WhenkD0, a path from vertexito vertexjwith
no intermediate vertex numbered higher than0has no intermediate vertices at all.
Such a path has at most one edge,  and henced
.0/
ij
Dw
ij
.  Following the above
discussion, we defined
.k/
ij
recursively by
d
.k/
ij
D
(
w
ij
ifkD0;
min

d
.k1/
ij
;d
.k1/
ik
Cd
.k1/
kj

ifk1:
(25.5)
Because for any path, all intermediate vertices are in the set
f
1;2;:::;n
g
,thema-
trixD
.n/
D

d
.n/
ij

gives the final answer:d
.n/
ij
Dı.i; j /for alli; j2V.
Computing the shortest-path weights bottom up
Based on recurrence (25.5), we can use the following bottom-up procedure to com-
pute the valuesd
.k/
ij
in order of increasing values ofk. Its input is ann	nmatrixW
defined as in equation (25.1).  The procedure returns the matrixD
.n/
of shortest-
path weights.

25.2The Floyd-Warshall algorithm695
FLOYD-WARSHALL.W /
1nDW:rows
2D
.0/
DW
3forkD1ton
4letD
.k/
D

d
.k/
ij

beanewn	nmatrix
5foriD1ton
6forjD1ton
7d
.k/
ij
Dmin

d
.k1/
ij
;d
.k1/
ik
Cd
.k1/
kj

8returnD
.n/
Figure 25.4 shows the matricesD
.k/
computed by the Floyd-Warshall  algorithm
for the graph in Figure 25.1.
The running time of the Floyd-Warshall  algorithm  is determined by the triply
nestedforloops of lines 3–7.  Because each execution of line 7 takesO.1/time,
the algorithm runs in time‚.n
3
/.  As in the final algorithm in Section 25.1, the
code is tight, with no elaborate data structures, and so the constant hidden in the
‚-notation is small. Thus, the Floyd-Warshall algorithm is quite practical for even
moderate-sized input graphs.
Constructing a shortest path
There are a variety of different methods for constructing shortest paths in the Floyd-
Warshall algorithm. One way is to compute the matrixDof shortest-path weights
and then construct the predecessor matrix...from theDmatrix.  Exercise 25.1-6
asks you to implement this method so that it runs inO.n
3
/time.  Given the pre-
decessor matrix...,theP
RINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT Hprocedure will print
the vertices on a given shortest path.
Alternatively,  we can compute  the  predecessor  matrix...while  the algorithm
computes  the  matricesD
.k/
.   Specifically,  we  compute  a  sequence  of  matrices
...
.0/
;...
.1/
;:::;...
.n/
,where...D...
.n/
and we define
.k/
ij
as the predecessor  of
vertexjon a shortest path from vertexiwith all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
.
We can give a recursive formulation of
.k/
ij
.WhenkD0, a shortest path fromi
tojhas no intermediate vertices at all. Thus,

.0/
ij
D
(
NILifiDjorw
ij
D1;
iifi¤jandw
ij
<1:
(25.6)
Fork1, if we take the pathikj,wherek¤j, then the predecessor
ofjwe choose is the same as the predecessor ofjwe chose on a shortest path
fromkwith all intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
.  Otherwise, we

696Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
D
.0/
D

03 814
10117
14011
21501
11160
 ̆
...
.0/
D

NIL11NIL1
NILNILNIL22
NIL3NILNILNIL
4NIL4NILNIL
NILNILNIL
5NIL
 ̆
D
.1/
D

03 814
10117
14011
25502
11160
 ̆
...
.1/
D

NIL11NIL1
NILNILNIL22
NIL3NILNILNIL
414NIL1
NILNILNIL5NIL
 ̆
D
.2/
D

03 844
10117
140511
25502
11160
 ̆
...
.2/
D

NIL1121
NILNILNIL22
NIL3NIL22
414
NIL1
NILNILNIL5NIL
 ̆
D
.3/
D

03844
10117
140511
21502
11160
 ̆
...
.3/
D

NIL1121
NILNILNIL22
NIL3NIL22
434
NIL1
NILNILNIL5NIL
 ̆
D
.4/
D

03144
30411
74053
21502
85160
 ̆
...
.4/
D

NIL1421
4
NIL421
43
NIL21
434
NIL1
4345
NIL
 ̆
D
.5/
D

01324
30411
74053
21502
85160
 ̆
...
.5/
D

NIL3451
4
NIL421
43
NIL21
434
NIL1
4345
NIL
 ̆
Figure 25.4The sequence of matricesD
.k/
and...
.k/
computed by the Floyd-Warshall algorithm
for the graph in Figure 25.1.

25.2The Floyd-Warshall algorithm697
choose the same predecessor ofjthat we chose on a shortest path fromiwith all
intermediate vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k1
g
. Formally, fork1,

.k/
ij
D
(

.k1/
ij
ifd
.k1/
ij
d
.k1/
ik
Cd
.k1/
kj
;

.k1/
kj
ifd
.k1/
ij
>d
.k1/
ik
Cd
.k1/
kj
:
(25.7)
We leave the incorporation  of the...
.k/
matrix computations  into the FLOYD-
W
ARSHALLprocedure as Exercise 25.2-3. Figure 25.4 shows the sequence of...
.k/
matrices that the resulting algorithm computes for the graph of Figure 25.1.  The
exercise also asks for the more difficult task of proving that the predecessor sub-
graphG
;i
is a shortest-paths tree with rooti. Exercise 25.2-7 asks for yet another
way to reconstruct shortest paths.
Transitive closure of a directed graph
Given a directed graphGD.V; E/with vertex setVD
f
1;2;:::;n
g
, we might
wish  to  determine  whetherGcontains  a  path  fromitojfor  all  vertex  pairs
i; j2V.Wedefinethetransitive closureofGas the graphG

D.V; E

/,where
E

D
f
.i; j /Wthere is a path from vertexito vertexjinG
g
:
One way to compute the transitive closure of a graph in‚.n
3
/time is to assign
a weight of1to each edge ofEand run the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. If there is a
path from vertexito vertexj,wegetd
ij
<n. Otherwise, we getd
ij
D1.
There is another,  similar way to compute the transitive closure ofGin‚.n
3
/
time that can save time and space in practice.  This method substitutes the logical
operations_(logical OR) and^(logical AND) for the arithmetic operations min
andCin the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. Fori; j; kD1;2;:::;n,wedefinet
.k/
ij
to
be1if there exists a path in graphGfrom vertexito vertexjwith all intermediate
vertices in the set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
,and0otherwise. We construct the transitive closure
G

D.V; E

/by putting edge.i; j /intoE

if and only ift
.n/
ij
D1.  A recursive
definition oft
.k/
ij
, analogous to recurrence (25.5), is
t
.0/
ij
D
(
0ifi¤jand.i; j /62E;
1ifiDjor.i; j /2E;
and fork1,
t
.k/
ij
Dt
.k1/
ij
_

t
.k1/
ik
^t
.k1/
kj

:(25.8)
As in the Floyd-Warshall algorithm, we compute the matricesT
.k/
D

t
.k/
ij

in
order of increasingk.

698Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
12
43
T
.0/
D

1000
0111
0110
1011

T
.1/
D

1000
0111
0110
1011

T
.2/
D

1000
0111
0111
1011

T
.3/
D

1000
0111
0111
1111

T
.4/
D

1000
1111
1111
1111

Figure 25.5A directed graph and the matricesT
.k/
computed by the transitive-closure algorithm.
TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE.G/
1nD
j
G:V
j
2letT
.0/
D

t
.0/
ij

beanewn	nmatrix
3foriD1ton
4forjD1ton
5ifi
==jor.i; j /2G:E
6t
.0/
ij
D1
7elset
.0/
ij
D0
8forkD1ton
9letT
.k/
D

t
.k/
ij

be a newn	nmatrix
10foriD1ton
11forjD1ton
12t
.k/
ij
Dt
.k1/
ij
_

t
.k1/
ik
^t
.k1/
kj

13returnT
.n/
Figure 25.5 shows the matricesT
.k/
computed by the TRANSITIVE-CLOSURE
procedure  on  a  sample  graph.   The  TRANSITIVE-CLOSUREprocedure,  like  the
Floyd-Warshall algorithm, runs in‚.n
3
/time.  On some computers, though, log-
ical  operations  on  single-bit  values  execute  faster  than  arithmetic  operations  on
integer  words of data.  Moreover,  because the direct transitive-closure  algorithm
uses only boolean values rather than integer values, its space requirement is less

25.2The Floyd-Warshall algorithm699
than the Floyd-Warshall algorithm’s by a factor corresponding to the size of a word
of computer storage.
Exercises
25.2-1
Run the Floyd-Warshall algorithm on the weighted, directed graph of Figure 25.2.
Show the matrixD
.k/
that results for each iteration of the outer loop.
25.2-2
Show how to compute the transitive closure using the technique of Section 25.1.
25.2-3
Modify the F
LOYD-WARSHALLprocedure to compute the...
.k/
matrices according
to equations (25.6) and (25.7). Prove rigorously that for alli2V, the predecessor
subgraphG
;i
is  a  shortest-paths  tree  with  rooti.(Hint:To  show  thatG
;i
is
acyclic,  first  show  that
.k/
ij
Dlimpliesd
.k/
ij
d
.k/
il
Cw
lj
,  according  to  the
definition of
.k/
ij
. Then, adapt the proof of Lemma 24.16.)
25.2-4
As it appears above, the Floyd-Warshall algorithm requires‚.n
3
/space, since we
computed
.k/
ij
fori; j; kD1;2;:::;n.  Show that the following procedure, which
simply drops all the superscripts, is correct, and thus only‚.n
2
/space is required.
F
LOYD-WARSHALL
0
.W /
1nDW:rows
2DDW
3forkD1ton
4foriD1ton
5forjD1ton
6d
ij
Dmin.d
ij
;d
ik
Cd
kj
/
7returnD
25.2-5
Suppose that we modify the way in which equation (25.7) handles equality:

.k/
ij
D
(

.k1/
ij
ifd
.k1/
ij
<d
.k1/
ik
Cd
.k1/
kj
;

.k1/
kj
ifd
.k1/
ij
d
.k1/
ik
Cd
.k1/
kj
:
Is this alternative definition of the predecessor matrix...correct?

700Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
25.2-6
How can we use the output of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm to detect the presence
of a negative-weight cycle?
25.2-7
Another  way to reconstruct  shortest  paths  in the  Floyd-Warshall  algorithm  uses
values
.k/
ij
fori; j; kD1;2;:::;n,where
.k/
ij
is the highest-numbered interme-
diate vertex of a shortest path fromitojin which all intermediate vertices are
in the set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
. Give a recursive formulation for
.k/
ij
, modify the FLOYD-
W
ARSHALLprocedure to compute the
.k/
ij
values,  and rewrite the PRINT-ALL-
P
AIRS-SHORTEST-PAT Hprocedure  to  take  the  matrixˆD


.n/
ij

as  an  input.
How is the matrixˆlike thestable in the matrix-chain multiplication problem of
Section 15.2?
25.2-8
Give anO.VE/-time algorithm for computing the transitive closure of a directed
graphGD.V; E/.
25.2-9
Suppose that we can compute the transitive closure of a directed acyclic graph in
f.
j
V
j
;
j
E
j
/time, wherefis a monotonically increasing function of
j
V
j
and
j
E
j
.
Show that the time to compute the transitive closureG

D.V; E

/of a general
directed graphGD.V; E/is thenf.
j
V
j
;
j
E
j
/CO.VCE

/.
25.3  Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs
Johnson’s  algorithm  finds shortest  paths  between all pairs inO.V
2
lgVCVE/
time. For sparse graphs, it is asymptotically faster than either repeated squaring of
matrices or the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. The algorithm either returns a matrix of
shortest-path weights for all pairs of vertices or reports that the input graph contains
a negative-weight cycle.  Johnson’s algorithm uses as subroutines both Dijkstra’s
algorithm and the Bellman-Ford algorithm, which Chapter 24 describes.
Johnson’s algorithm uses the technique ofreweighting, which works as follows.
If all edge weightswin a graphGD.V; E/are nonnegative, we can find short-
est paths between all pairs of vertices by running Dijkstra’s algorithm once from
each vertex; with the Fibonacci-heap min-priority queue, the running time of this
all-pairs algorithm isO.V
2
lgVCVE/.IfGhas negative-weight edges but no
negative-weight cycles, we simply compute a new set of nonnegative edge weights

25.3Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs701
that allows us to use the same method. The new set of edge weightsywmust satisfy
two important properties:
1.  For all pairs of verticesu; 2V,apathpis a shortest path fromutousing
weight  functionwif and only ifpis also a shortest path fromutousing
weight functionyw.
2.  For all edges.u; /, the new weightyw.u; /is nonnegative.
As we shall see in a moment, we can preprocessGto determine the new weight
functionywinO.VE/time.
Preserving shortest paths by reweighting
The following lemma shows how easily we can reweight the edges to satisfy the
first property above. We useıto denote shortest-path weights derived from weight
functionwand
y
ıto denote shortest-path weights derived from weight functionyw.
Lemma 25.1 (Reweighting does not change shortest paths)
Given a weighted, directed graphGD.V; E/with weight functionwWE!R,
lethWV!Rbe any function mapping vertices to real numbers.  For each edge
.u; /2E,define
yw.u; /Dw.u; /Ch.u/h./ :(25.9)
LetpDh
0
;
1
; :::; 
k
ibe any path from vertex
0
to vertex
k
.Thenpis a
shortest path from
0
to
k
with weight functionwif and only if it is a shortest path
with weight functionyw.Thatis,w.p/Dı.
0
;
k
/if and only ifyw.p/D
y
ı.
0
;
k
/.
Furthermore,Ghas a negative-weight cycle using weight functionwif and only
ifGhas a negative-weight cycle using weight functionyw.
ProofWe start by showing that
yw.p/Dw.p/Ch.
0
/h.
k
/:(25.10)
We have
yw.p/D
k
X
iD1
yw.
i1
;
i
/
D
k
X
iD1
.w.
i1
;
i
/Ch.
i1
/h.
i
//
D
k
X
iD1
w.
i1
;
i
/Ch.
0
/h.
k
/(because the sum telescopes)
Dw.p/Ch.
0
/h.
k
/:

702Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
Therefore,  any pathpfrom
0
to
k
hasyw.p/Dw.p/Ch.
0
/h.
k
/.Be-
causeh.
0
/andh.
k
/do  not  depend  on  the  path,  if  one  path  from
0
to
k
is
shorter than another using weight functionw, then it is also shorter usingyw. Thus,
w.p/Dı.
0
;
k
/if and only ifyw.p/D
y
ı.
0
;
k
/.
Finally, we show thatGhas a negative-weight cycle using weight functionwif
and only ifGhas a negative-weight cycle using weight functionyw.  Consider any
cyclecDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
0
D
k
. By equation (25.10),
yw.c/Dw.c/Ch.
0
/h.
k
/
Dw.c/ ;
and thuschas negative weight usingwif and only if it has negative weight us-
ingyw.
Producing nonnegative weights by reweighting
Our next goal is to ensure that the second property holds:  we wantyw.u; /to be
nonnegative  for  all  edges.u; /2E.   Given  a  weighted,  directed  graphGD
.V; E/with weight functionwWE!R,wemakeanewgraphG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/,
whereV
0
DV[
f
s
g
for some new vertexs62VandE
0
DE[
f
.s; /W2V
g
.
We extend the weight functionwso thatw.s; /D0for all2V.  Note that
becauseshas no edges that enter it, no shortest paths inG
0
, other than those with
sources, contains.  Moreover,G
0
has no negative-weight cycles if and only ifG
has no negative-weight cycles.  Figure 25.6(a) shows the graphG
0
corresponding
to the graphGof Figure 25.1.
Now  suppose  thatGandG
0
have  no  negative-weight  cycles.   Let  us  define
h./Dı.s; /for  all2V
0
.    By  the  triangle  inequality  (Lemma  24.10),
we  haveh./h.u/Cw.u; /for  all  edges.u; /2E
0
.   Thus,  if  we  de-
fine  the  new  weightsywby  reweighting  according  to  equation  (25.9),  we  have
yw.u; /Dw.u; /Ch.u/h./0, and we have satisfied the second property.
Figure 25.6(b) shows the graphG
0
from Figure 25.6(a) with reweighted edges.
Computing all-pairs shortest paths
Johnson’s algorithm to compute all-pairs shortest paths uses the Bellman-Ford al-
gorithm (Section 24.1) and Dijkstra’s algorithm (Section 24.3) as subroutines.  It
assumes implicitly that the edges are stored in adjacency lists.  The algorithm re-
turns the usual
j
V
j
	
j
V
j
matrixDDd
ij
,whered
ij
Dı.i; j /, or it reports that
the  input  graph  contains  a  negative-weight  cycle.   As  is  typical  for  an  all-pairs
shortest-paths algorithm, we assume that the vertices are numbered from1to
j
V
j
.

25.3Johnson’s algorithm for sparse graphs703
2
1
5
4
34
8
2
6
7
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
2/1
2/–3
2/20/–4
2/3
0/–4
0/1
2/–1
2/7
0/4
0/52/3
2/2
0/–1
0/–5
2/–2
4/8
2/5
2/1
2/6
(a)
(c)
(b)
–4
–4
–1
–5
–5
3
2
1
5
4
40
13
2
2
10
0
5
1
0
4
0
0
0
0
–4
–1
–5
0
3
2
1
54
4
0
13
2
2
10
0
00
3
(d)
2
1
54
40
13
2
2
10
0
00
3
(e)
2
1
54
4
0
13
2
2
10
0
00
3
(f)
2
1
54
4
0
13
2
2
10
0
00
3
(g)
2
1
54
4
0
13
2
2
10
0
00
3
0/00/0
0/0
0/0
0/0
00
Figure 25.6Johnson’s  all-pairs  shortest-paths  algorithm  run  on  the  graph  of  Figure  25.1.   Ver-
tex numbers  appear  outside  the  vertices.(a)The graphG
0
with the  original  weight  functionw.
The new vertexsis black.   Within each  vertexish./Dı.s; /.(b)After reweighting  each
edge.u; /with weight functionyw.u; /Dw.u; /Ch.u/h./.(c)–(g)The result of running
is black, and shaded edges are in the shortest-paths tree computed by the algorithm.  Within each
vertexare the values
y
ı.u; /andı.u; /, separated by a slash. The valued
u
Dı.u; /is equal to
y
ı.    /Ch./h.u/
Dijkstra’s algorithm on each vertex ofGusing weight functionwy. In each part, the source vertexu
.
u;

704Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
JOHNSON.G; w/
1computeG
0
,whereG
0
:VDG:V[
f
s
g
,
G
0
:EDG:E[
f
.s; /W2G:V
g
,and
w.s; /D0for all2G:V
2ifB
ELLMAN-FORD.G
0
;w;s/==FALSE
3print “the input graph contains a negative-weight cycle”
4else foreach vertex2G
0
:V
5seth./to the value ofı.s; /
computed by the Bellman-Ford algorithm
6foreach edge.u; /2G
0
:E
7yw.u; /Dw.u; /Ch.u/h./
8letDD.d
u
/be a newn	nmatrix
9foreach vertexu2G:V
10run D
IJKSTRA.G;yw; u/to compute
y
ı.u; /for all2G:V
11foreach vertex2G:V
12d
u
D
y
ı.u; /Ch./h.u/
13returnD
This code simply performs the actions we specified earlier.  Line 1 producesG
0
.
Line 2 runs the Bellman-Ford algorithm onG
0
with weight functionwand source
vertexs.IfG
0
, and henceG, contains a negative-weight cycle, line 3 reports the
problem. Lines 4–12 assume thatG
0
contains no negative-weight cycles. Lines 4–5
seth./to the shortest-path weightı.s; /computed by the Bellman-Ford algo-
rithm for all2V
0
. Lines 6–7 compute the new weightsyw. For each pair of ver-
ticesu; 2V,theforloop of lines 9–12 computes the shortest-path weight
y
ı.u; /
by  calling  Dijkstra’s  algorithm  once  from  each  vertex  inV.   Line  12  stores  in
matrix entryd
u
the correct shortest-path  weightı.u; /, calculated  using equa-
tion (25.10).  Finally, line 13 returns the completedDmatrix.  Figure 25.6 depicts
the execution of Johnson’s algorithm.
If we implement the min-priority queue in Dijkstra’s algorithm by a Fibonacci
heap, Johnson’s algorithm runs inO.V
2
lgVCVE/time. The simpler binary min-
heap implementation yields a running time ofO.VElgV/, which is still asymp-
totically faster than the Floyd-Warshall algorithm if the graph is sparse.
Exercises
25.3-1
Use Johnson’s algorithm to find the shortest paths between all pairs of vertices in
the graph of Figure 25.2. Show the values ofhandywcomputed by the algorithm.

Problems for Chapter 25705
25.3-2
What is the purpose of adding the new vertexstoV, yieldingV
0
?
25.3-3
Suppose  thatw.u; /0for  all  edges.u; /2E.   What  is  the  relationship
between the weight functionswandyw?
25.3-4
Professor  Greenstreet  claims  that there  is a simpler  way to reweight  edges  than
the method used in Johnson’s algorithm.  Lettingw

Dmin
.u;/2E
f
w.u; /
g
,just
defineyw.u; /Dw.u; /w

for all edges.u; /2E.  What is wrong with the
professor’s method of reweighting?
25.3-5
Suppose that we run Johnson’s algorithm on a directed graphGwith weight func-
tionw.  Show that ifGcontains a0-weight cyclec,thenyw.u; /D0for every
edge.u; /inc.
25.3-6
Professor Michener claims that there is no need to create a new source vertex in
line 1 of J
OHNSON. He claims that instead we can just useG
0
DGand letsbe any
vertex.  Give an example of a weighted, directed graphGfor which incorporating
the professor’s idea into J
OHNSONcauses incorrect answers.  Then show that ifG
is strongly connected (every vertex is reachable from every other vertex), the results
returned by J
OHNSONwith the professor’s modification are correct.
Problems
25-1  Transitive closure of a dynamic graph
Suppose that we wish to maintain the transitive closure of a directed graphGD
.V; E/as we insert edges intoE.  That is, after each edge has been inserted,  we
want to update the transitive closure of the edges inserted so far.  Assume that the
graphGhas  no  edges  initially  and  that  we represent  the  transitive  closure  as a
boolean matrix.
a.Show how to update the transitive closureG

D.V; E

/of a graphGD.V; E/
inO.V
2
/time when a new edge is added toG.
b.Give an example of a graphGand an edgeesuch that.V
2
/time is required
to update the transitive closure after the insertion ofeintoG, no matter what
algorithm is used.

706Chapter 25All-Pairs Shortest Paths
c.Describe an efficient algorithm for updating the transitive closure as edges are
inserted into the graph. For any sequence ofninsertions, your algorithm should
run in total time
P
n
iD1
t
i
DO.V
3
/,wheret
i
is the time to update the transitive
closure upon inserting theith edge. Prove that your algorithm attains this time
bound.
25-2  Shortest paths in-dense graphs
AgraphGD.V; E/is-denseif
j
E
j
D‚.V
1C
/for some constantin the
range0<1.Byusingd-ary min-heaps (see Problem 6-2) in shortest-paths
algorithms on-dense graphs, we can match the running times of Fibonacci-heap-
based algorithms without using as complicated a data structure.
a.What  are  the  asymptotic  running  times  for  I
NSERT,EXTRACT-MIN,and
D
ECREASE-KEY,asafunctionofdand the numbernof elements in ad-ary
min-heap?  What are these running times if we choosedD‚.n
 ̨
/for some
constant0< ̨1?  Compare these running times to the amortized costs of
these operations for a Fibonacci heap.
b.Show how to compute shortest paths from a single source on an-dense directed
graphGD.V; E/with no negative-weight edges inO.E/time. (Hint:Pickd
asafunctionof.)
c.Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem on an-dense directed
graphGD.V; E/with no negative-weight edges inO.VE/time.
d.Show how to solve the all-pairs shortest-paths problem inO.VE/time on an
-dense directed graphGD.V; E/that may have negative-weight edges but
has no negative-weight cycles.
Chapter notes
Lawler  [224]  has  a  good  discussion  of  the  all-pairs  shortest-paths  problem,  al-
though he does not analyze solutions for sparse graphs.  He attributes the matrix-
multiplication algorithm to the folklore.  The Floyd-Warshall algorithm is due to
Floyd [105], who based it on a theorem of Warshall [349] that describes how to
compute the transitive closure of boolean matrices.  Johnson’s algorithm is taken
from [192].
Several  researchers  have  given  improved  algorithms  for  computing  shortest
paths  via  matrix  multiplication.Fredman  [111]  shows  how  to  solve  the  all-
pairs shortest  paths problem  usingO.V
5=2
/comparisons  between sums of edge

Notes for Chapter 25707
weights and obtains an algorithm that runs inO.V
3
.lg lgV=lgV/
1=3
/time, which
is slightly better than the running time of the Floyd-Warshall algorithm. Han [159]
reduced  the  running  time  toO.V
3
.lg lgV=lgV/
5=4
/.   Another  line  of  research
demonstrates that we can apply algorithms for fast matrix multiplication (see the
chapter notes for Chapter 4) to the all-pairs shortest paths problem.  LetO.n
!
/be
the running time of the fastest algorithm for multiplyingn	nmatrices; currently
!  <  2:376[78].  Galil and Margalit [123, 124] and Seidel [308] designed algo-
rithms  that  solve  the  all-pairs  shortest  paths  problem  in undirected,  unweighted
graphs in.V
!
p.V //time, wherep.n/denotes a particular function that is poly-
logarithmically  bounded  inn.   In dense  graphs,  these  algorithms  are faster  than
theO.VE/time needed to perform
j
V
j
breadth-first searches. Several researchers
have  extended  these  results  to  give  algorithms  for  solving  the  all-pairs  shortest
paths problem in undirected graphs in which the edge weights are integers in the
range
f
1;2;:::;W
g
.  The asymptotically fastest such algorithm, by Shoshan and
Zwick [316], runs in timeO.W V
!
p.V W //.
Karger, Koller, and Phillips [196] and independently McGeoch [247] have given
a time bound that depends onE

, the set of edges inEthat participate in some
shortest path. Given a graph with nonnegative edge weights, their algorithms run in
O.VE

CV
2
lgV/time and improve upon running Dijkstra’s algorithm
j
V
j
times
when
j
E

j
Do.E/.
Baswana, Hariharan, and Sen [33] examined decremental algorithms for main-
taining  all-pairs  shortest  paths  and  transitive-closure  information.Decremen-
tal  algorithms  allow  a  sequence  of  intermixed  edge  deletions  and  queries;  by
comparison,  Problem  25-1,  in  which  edges  are  inserted,  asks  for  an  incremen-
tal algorithm.   The algorithms  by Baswana,  Hariharan,  and Sen are randomized
and,  when  a  path  exists,  their  transitive-closure  algorithm  can  fail  to  report  it
with  probability1=n
c
for  an  arbitraryc>0.   The  query  times  areO.1/with
high  probability.   For  transitive  closure,  the  amortized  time  for  each  update  is
O.V
4=3
lg
1=3
V/.   For  all-pairs  shortest  paths,  the  update  times  depend  on  the
queries.  For queries just giving the shortest-path weights, the amortized time per
update isO.V
3
=Elg
2
V/.  To report  the actual  shortest  path,  the amortized up-
date time is min.O.V
3=2
p
lgV/;O.V
3
=Elg
2
V//.  Demetrescu and Italiano [84]
showed how to handle update and query operations when edges are both inserted
and deleted,  as long as each given edge has a bounded  range of possible  values
drawn from the real numbers.
Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5] defined an algebraic structure known as a “closed
semiring,” which serves as a general framework for solving path problems in di-
rected graphs.  Both the Floyd-Warshall algorithm and the transitive-closure algo-
rithm from Section 25.2 are instantiations of an all-pairs algorithm based on closed
semirings.  Maggs and Plotkin [240] showed how to find minimum spanning trees
using a closed semiring.

26Maximum Flow
Just as we can model a road map as a directed graph in order to find the shortest
path from one point to another, we can also interpret a directed graph as a “flow
network”  and use it to answer questions  about  material  flows.   Imagine a mate-
rial coursing through a system from a source, where the material is produced, to
a sink,  where it is consumed.   The source  produces  the material  at some steady
rate, and the sink consumes the material at the same rate. The “flow” of the mate-
rial at any point in the system is intuitively the rate at which the material moves.
Flow networks can model many problems, including liquids flowing through pipes,
parts through assembly lines, current through electrical networks, and information
through communication networks.
We can think of each directed edge in a flow network as a conduit for the mate-
rial. Each conduit has a stated capacity, given as a maximum rate at which the ma-
terial can flow through the conduit, such as200gallons of liquid per hour through
apipeor20amperes  of  electrical  current  through  a  wire.   Vertices  are  conduit
junctions, and other than the source and sink, material flows through the vertices
without collecting in them. In other words, the rate at which material enters a ver-
tex must equal the rate at which it leaves the vertex.  We call this property “flow
conservation,” and it is equivalent to Kirchhoff’s current law when the material is
electrical current.
In the maximum-flow problem, we wish to compute the greatest rate at which
we can ship material from the source to the sink without violating  any capacity
constraints.  It is one of the simplest problems concerning flow networks and, as
we shall  see in this chapter,  this problem  can be solved  by efficient  algorithms.
Moreover, we can adapt the basic techniques used in maximum-flow algorithms to
solve other network-flow problems.
This chapter presents two general methods for solving the maximum-flow prob-
lem.   Section  26.1  formalizes  the  notions  of  flow  networks  and  flows,  formally
defining the maximum-flow problem.  Section 26.2 describes the classical method
of Ford and Fulkerson for finding maximum flows. An application of this method,

26.1Flow networks709
finding  a  maximum  matching  in  an  undirected  bipartite  graph,  appears  in  Sec-
tion 26.3. Section 26.4 presents the push-relabel method, which underlies many of
the fastest algorithms for network-flow problems. Section 26.5 covers the “relabel-
to-front”  algorithm,  a particular  implementation  of the push-relabel  method that
runs in timeO.V
3
/.  Although this algorithm is not the fastest algorithm known,
it illustrates some of the techniques used in the asymptotically fastest algorithms,
and it is reasonably efficient in practice.
26.1  Flow networks
In this section, we give a graph-theoretic definition of flow networks, discuss their
properties,  and define the maximum-flow problem  precisely.   We also introduce
some helpful notation.
Flow networks and flows
Aflow networkGD.V; E/is a directed graph in which each edge.u; /2E
has a nonnegativecapacityc.u; /0.  We further require that ifEcontains an
edge.u; /,  then there  is no edge.; u/in the reverse  direction.   (We shall see
shortly how to work around this restriction.)  If.u; /62E, then for convenience
we definec.u; /D0,  and we disallow  self-loops.   We distinguish  two vertices
in a flow network:  asourcesand asinkt. For convenience, we assume that each
vertex lies on some path from the source to the sink. That is, for each vertex2V,
the flow network contains a pathst.  The graph is therefore connected
and, since each vertex other thanshas at least one entering edge,
j
E
j

j
V
j
1.
Figure 26.1 shows an example of a flow network.
We are now ready to define flows more formally.  LetGD.V; E/be a flow
network with a capacity functionc.Letsbe the source of the network, and lettbe
the sink.  AflowinGis a real-valued functionfWV	V!Rthat satisfies the
following two properties:
Capacity constraint:For allu; 2V, we require0
f.u;/c.u; /.
Flow conservation:For allu2V
f
s; t
g
, we require
X
2V
f.;u/D
X
2V
f.u;/:
When.u; /62E, there can be no flow fromuto,andf.u;/D0.

710Chapter 26Maximum Flow
st
16
12
20
7
9
4
13
14
4
Edmonton
Calgary
Saskatoon
Regina
VancouverWinnipeg
st
11/16
12/12
15/20
7/7
4/9
1/4
8/13
11/14
4/4
(a)(b)
v
1
v
1
v
2
v
2
v
3
v
3
v
4
v
4
Figure 26.1  (a)A flow networkGD.V; E/for the Lucky Puck Company’s trucking problem.
The Vancouver factory is the sources, and the Winnipeg warehouse is the sinkt. The company ships
pucks through intermediate cities, but onlyc.u; /crates per day can go from cityuto city. Each
edge is labeled with its capacity.(b)AflowfinGwith value
j
f
j
D19. Each edge.u; /is labeled
byf.u;/=c.u;/.  The slash notation merely separates the flow and capacity; it does not indicate
division.
We call the nonnegative quantityf.u;/the flow from vertexuto vertex.The
value
j
f
j
of a flowfis defined as
j
f
j
D
X
2V
f.s;/
X
2V
f.;s/;(26.1)
that is, the total flow out of the source minus the flow into the source. (Here, the
j

j
notation denotes flow value, not absolute value or cardinality.)  Typically, a flow
network will not have any edges into the source, and the flow into the source, given
by the summation
P
2V
f.;s/, will be0. We include it, however, because when
we introduce residual networks later in this chapter, the flow into the source will
become significant. In themaximum-flow problem, we are given a flow networkG
with sourcesand sinkt, and we wish to find a flow of maximum value.
Before seeing an example of a network-flow problem, let us briefly explore the
definition  of  flow  and  the  two  flow  properties.   The  capacity  constraint  simply
says that the flow from one vertex to another must be nonnegative and must not
exceed the given capacity.  The flow-conservation property says that the total flow
into  a vertex  other  than the  source  or  sink must  equal  the total  flow out  of  that
vertex—informally, “flow in equals flow out.”
An example of flow
A flow network  can model  the  trucking  problem  shown in  Figure 26.1(a).   The
Lucky  Puck  Company  has  a  factory  (sources)  in  Vancouver  that  manufactures
hockey pucks, and it has a warehouse (sinkt) in Winnipeg that stocks them. Lucky

26.1Flow networks711
st
16
12
20
7
9
4
13
14
4
(a)(b)
v
1
v
2
v
3
v
4
10
st
16
12
20
7
9
4
13
14
4
v
1
v
2
v
3
v
4
v′
10
10
Figure 26.2Converting a network with antiparallel edges to an equivalent one with no antiparallel
edges.(a)A flow network containing both the edges.
1
;
2
/and.
2
;
1
/.(b)An equivalent network
with no antiparallel edges.  We add the new vertex
0
, and we replace edge.
1
;
2
/by the pair of
edges.
1
;
0
/and.
0
;
2
/, both with the same capacity as.
1
;
2
/.
Puck leases space on trucks from another firm to ship the pucks from the factory
to the warehouse.  Because the trucks travel over specified routes (edges) between
cities (vertices) and have a limited capacity, Lucky Puck can ship at mostc.u; /
crates per day between each pair of citiesuandin Figure 26.1(a).  Lucky Puck
has no control over these routes and capacities,  and so the company cannot alter
the  flow  network  shown  in  Figure  26.1(a).   They  need  to  determine  the  largest
numberpof crates per day that they can ship and then to produce this amount, since
there is no point in producing more pucks than they can ship to their warehouse.
Lucky Puck is not concerned with how long it takes for a given puck to get from
the factory to the warehouse; they care only thatpcrates per day leave the factory
andpcrates per day arrive at the warehouse.
We can model the “flow” of shipments with a flow in this network because the
number of crates shipped per day from one city to another is subject to a capacity
constraint.  Additionally,  the model must obey flow conservation,  for in a steady
state, the rate at which pucks enter an intermediate city must equal the rate at which
they leave. Otherwise, crates would accumulate at intermediate cities.
Modeling problems with antiparallel edges
Suppose that the trucking firm offered Lucky Puck the opportunity to lease space
for 10 crates in trucks going from Edmonton to Calgary.  It would seem natural to
add this opportunity to our example and form the network shown in Figure 26.2(a).
This network suffers from one problem, however:  it violates our original assump-
tion that if an edge.
1
;
2
/2E,then.
2
;
1
/62E. We call the two edges.
1
;
2
/
and.
2
;
1
/antiparallel.  Thus, if we wish to model a flow problem with antipar-
allel edges, we must transform the network into an equivalent one containing no

712Chapter 26Maximum Flow
antiparallel  edges.   Figure  26.2(b)  displays  this equivalent  network.   We choose
one of the two antiparallel edges, in this case.
1
;
2
/, and split it by adding a new
vertex
0
and replacing edge.
1
;
2
/with the pair of edges.
1
;
0
/and.
0
;
2
/.
We also set the capacity of both new edges to the capacity of the original  edge.
The resulting network satisfies the property that if an edge is in the network, the
reverse edge is not. Exercise 26.1-1 asks you to prove that the resulting network is
equivalent to the original one.
Thus, we see that a real-world flow problem might be most naturally modeled
by a network  with antiparallel  edges.   It will be convenient  to disallow  antipar-
allel edges, however, and so we have a straightforward way to convert a network
containing antiparallel edges into an equivalent one with no antiparallel edges.
Networks with multiple sources and sinks
A maximum-flow  problem  may have  several  sources  and  sinks,  rather  than  just
one of each.  The Lucky Puck Company,  for example,  might actually have a set
ofmfactories
f
s
1
;s
2
;:::;s
m
g
and a set ofnwarehouses
f
t
1
;t
2
;:::;t
n
g
,asshown
in Figure 26.3(a).  Fortunately, this problem is no harder than ordinary maximum
flow.
We can reduce the problem of determining a maximum flow in a network with
multiple sources and multiple sinks to an ordinary maximum-flow problem.  Fig-
ure 26.3(b) shows how to convert the network from (a) to an ordinary flow network
with only a single source and a single sink.  We add asupersourcesand add a
directed edge.s; s
i
/with capacityc.s; s
i
/D1for eachiD1;2;:::;m.Wealso
create a newsupersinktand add a directed edge.t
i
;t/with capacityc.t
i
;t/D1
for eachiD1;2;:::;n. Intuitively, any flow in the network in (a) corresponds to
a flow in the network in (b), and vice versa.  The single sourcessimply provides
as much flow as desired for the multiple sourcess
i
, and the single sinktlikewise
consumes as much flow as desired for the multiple sinkst
i
.  Exercise 26.1-2 asks
you to prove formally that the two problems are equivalent.
Exercises
26.1-1
Show that splitting an edge in a flow network yields an equivalent network.  More
formally, suppose that flow networkGcontains edge.u; /, and we create a new
flow networkG
0
by creating  a new vertexxand replacing.u; /by new edges
.u; x/and.x; /withc.u; x/Dc.x; /Dc.u; /.  Show that a maximum flow
inG
0
has the same value as a maximum flow inG.

26.1Flow networks713
10
(a)
12
5
8
14
7
11
2
3
15
6
20
13
18
10
12
5
8
14
7
11
2
3
15
6
20
13
18
∞∞
∞
∞
∞
∞
∞
∞
s
1
s
1
s
2
s
2
s
3
s
3
s
4
s
4
s
5
s
5
t
1
t
1
t
2
t
2
t
3
t
3
(b)
st
Figure 26.3Converting a multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow problem into a problem
with a single source and a single sink.(a)A flow network with five sourcesSD
f
s
1
;s
2
;s
3
;s
4
;s
5
g
and three sinksTD
f
t
1
;t
2
;t
3
g
.(b)An equivalent single-source, single-sink flow network.  We add
a supersourcesand an edge with infinite capacity fromsto each of the multiple sources.  We also
add a supersinktand an edge with infinite capacity from each of the multiple sinks tot.
26.1-2
Extend  the  flow  properties  and  definitions  to  the  multiple-source,  multiple-sink
problem.   Show  that  any  flow  in  a  multiple-source,  multiple-sink  flow  network
corresponds to a flow of identical value in the single-source, single-sink network
obtained by adding a supersource and a supersink, and vice versa.
26.1-3
Suppose that a flow networkGD.V; E/violates the assumption that the network
contains a pathstfor all vertices2V.Letube a vertex for which there
is no pathsut.  Show that there must exist a maximum flowfinGsuch
thatf.u;/Df.;u/D0for all vertices2V.

714Chapter 26Maximum Flow
26.1-4
Letfbe a flow in a network, and let ̨be a real number. Thescalar flow product,
denoted ̨f, is a function fromV	VtoRdefined by
. ̨f /.u; /D ̨f.u;/:
Prove that the flows in a network form aconvex set. That is, show that iff
1
andf
2
are flows, then so is ̨f
1
C.1 ̨/f
2
for all ̨in the range0 ̨1.
26.1-5
State the maximum-flow problem as a linear-programming problem.
26.1-6
Professor Adam has two children who, unfortunately, dislike each other. The prob-
lem is so severe that not only do they refuse to walk to school together, but in fact
each one refuses to walk on any block that the other child has stepped on that day.
The children have no problem with their paths crossing at a corner.  Fortunately
both the professor’s house and the school are on corners, but beyond that he is not
sure if it is going to be possible to send both of his children to the same school.
The professor has a map of his town.  Show how to formulate the problem of de-
termining whether both his children can go to the same school as a maximum-flow
problem.
26.1-7
Suppose that, in addition to edge capacities, a flow network hasvertex capacities.
That is each vertexhas a limitl./on how much flow can pass though.Show
how to transform a flow networkGD.V; E/with vertex capacities into an equiv-
alent flow networkG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/without vertex capacities, such that a maximum
flow inG
0
has the same value as a maximum flow inG.  How many vertices and
edges doesG
0
have?
26.2  The Ford-Fulkerson method
This section presents the Ford-Fulkerson method for solving the maximum-flow
problem. We call it a “method” rather than an “algorithm” because it encompasses
several implementations with differing running times. The Ford-Fulkerson method
depends  on  three  important  ideas  that  transcend  the  method  and  are  relevant  to
many  flow algorithms  and  problems:  residual  networks,  augmenting  paths,  and
cuts.  These ideas are essential to the important max-flow min-cut theorem (The-
orem 26.6), which characterizes the value of a maximum flow in terms of cuts of

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method715
the flow network.  We end this section by presenting one specific implementation
of the Ford-Fulkerson method and analyzing its running time.
The Ford-Fulkerson method iteratively increases the value of the flow. We start
withf.u;/D0for  allu; 2V,  giving  an  initial  flow of value0.   At  each
iteration, we increase the flow value inGby finding an “augmenting path” in an
associated  “residual  network”G
f
.   Once  we  know  the  edges  of  an  augmenting
path inG
f
, we can easily identify specific edges inGfor which we can change
the flow so that we increase the value of the flow.  Although each iteration of the
Ford-Fulkerson method increases the value of the flow, we shall see that the flow
on any particular edge ofGmay increase or decrease; decreasing the flow on some
edges may be necessary in order to enable an algorithm to send more flow from the
source to the sink.  We repeatedly augment the flow until the residual network has
no more augmenting paths.  The max-flow min-cut theorem will show that upon
termination, this process yields a maximum flow.
F
ORD-FULKERSON-METHOD.G;s;t/
1    initialize flowfto0
2whilethere exists an augmenting pathpin the residual networkG
f
3augment flowfalongp
4returnf
In order to implement and analyze the Ford-Fulkerson method, we need to intro-
duce several additional concepts.
Residual networks
Intuitively, given a flow networkGand a flowf, the residual networkG
f
consists
of edges with capacities that represent how we can change the flow on edges ofG.
An edge of the flow network can admit an amount of additional flow equal to the
edge’s capacity  minus the flow on that  edge.   If that  value is positive,  we place
that  edge  intoG
f
with  a  “residual  capacity”  ofc
f
.u; /Dc.u; /f.u;/.
The  only  edges  ofGthat  are  inG
f
are  those  that  can  admit  more  flow;  those
edges.u; /whose flow equals their capacity havec
f
.u; /D0, and they are not
inG
f
.
The residual  networkG
f
may also contain  edges that  are not  inG,however.
As an algorithm manipulates the flow, with the goal of increasing the total flow, it
might need to decrease the flow on a particular edge.  In order to represent a pos-
sible decrease of a positive flowf.u;/on an edge inG, we place an edge.; u/
intoG
f
with residual capacityc
f
.; u/Df.u;/—that is, an edge that can admit
flow in the opposite direction to.u; /, at most canceling out the flow on.u; /.
These reverse edges in the residual network allow an algorithm to send back flow

716Chapter 26Maximum Flow
it  has  already  sent  along  an  edge.   Sending  flow back  along  an  edge  is  equiva-
lent todecreasingthe flow on the edge,  which is a necessary operation in many
algorithms.
More formally, suppose that we have a flow networkGD.V; E/with sources
and sinkt.Letfbe a flow inG, and consider a pair of verticesu; 2V.We
define theresidual capacityc
f
.u; /by
c
f
.u; /D

c.u; /f.u;/if.u; /2E;
f.;u/if.; u/2E;
0otherwise:
(26.2)
Because of our assumption that.u; /2Eimplies.; u/62E, exactly one case in
equation (26.2) applies to each ordered pair of vertices.
As an example of equation (26.2), ifc.u; /D16andf.u;/D11,thenwe
can increasef.u;/by up toc
f
.u; /D5units before we exceed the capacity
constraint on edge.u; /.  We also wish to allow an algorithm to return up to11
units of flow fromtou, and hencec
f
.; u/D11.
Given a flow networkGD.V; E/and a flowf,theresidual networkofG
induced byfisG
f
D.V; E
f
/,where
E
f
D
f
.u; /2V	VWc
f
.u; / > 0
g
:(26.3)
That is, as promised above, each edge of the residual network, orresidual edge,
can admit a flow that is greater than0.  Figure 26.4(a) repeats the flow networkG
and flowfof Figure 26.1(b), and Figure 26.4(b) shows the corresponding residual
networkG
f
. The edges inE
f
are either edges inEor their reversals, and thus
j
E
f
j
2
j
E
j
:
Observe that the residual networkG
f
is similar to a flow network with capacities
given byc
f
.  It does not satisfy our definition of a flow network because it may
contain both an edge.u; /and its reversal.; u/.  Other than this difference,  a
residual network has the same properties as a flow network, and we can define a
flow in the residual network as one that satisfies the definition of a flow, but with
respect to capacitiesc
f
in the networkG
f
.
A flow in a residual network provides a roadmap for adding flow to the original
flow network.  Iffis a flow inGandf
0
is a flow in the corresponding residual
networkG
f
,wedefinef"f
0
,theaugmentationof flowfbyf
0
, to be a function
fromV	VtoR,definedby
.f"f
0
/.u; /D
(
f.u;/Cf
0
.u; /f
0
.; u/if.u; /2E;
0otherwise:
(26.4)

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method717
9
15
st
5
12
5
7
5
3
1
8
11
4
st
11/16
12/12
19/20
7/7
9
1/4
12/13
11/14
4/4
(b)
(c)
11
5
3
4
st
11/16
12/12
15/20
7/7
4/9
1/4
8/13
11/14
4/4
(d)
19
st
5
12
1
7
3
1
12
11
4
11
1
3
v
1
v
1
v
1
v
1
v
2
v
2
v
2
v
2
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
4
v
4
v
4
v
4
(a)
Figure 26.4  (a)The flow networkGand flowfof Figure 26.1(b).(b)The residual networkG
f
with augmenting  pathpshaded;  its residual  capacity  isc
f
.p/Dc
f
.
2
;
3
/D4.   Edges  with
residual capacity equal to0,suchas.
1
;
3
/, are not shown, a convention we follow in the remainder
of this section.(c)The flow inGthat results from augmenting along pathpby its residual capacity4.
Edges carrying no flow, such as.
3
;
2
/, are labeled only by their capacity, another convention we
follow throughout.(d)The residual network induced by the flow in (c).
The intuition behind this definition follows the definition of the residual network.
We increase  the  flow  on.u; /byf
0
.u; /but  decrease  it  byf
0
.; u/because
pushing flow on the reverse edge in the residual network signifies decreasing the
flow  in  the  original  network.   Pushing  flow  on  the  reverse  edge  in  the  residual
network is also known ascancellation. For example, if we send5crates of hockey
pucks fromutoand send2crates fromtou, we could equivalently (from the
perspective of the final result) just send3creates fromutoand none fromtou.
Cancellation of this type is crucial for any maximum-flow algorithm.
Lemma 26.1
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt,andletfbeaflow
inG.LetG
f
be the residual network ofGinduced byf,andletf
0
be a flow
inG
f
.  Then the functionf"f
0
defined in equation (26.4) is a flow inGwith
value
j
f"f
0
j
D
j
f
j
C
j
f
0
j
.
ProofWe first verify thatf"f
0
obeys the capacity constraint for each edge inE
and flow conservation at each vertex inV
f
s; t
g
.

718Chapter 26Maximum Flow
For the capacity  constraint,  first  observe  that  if.u; /2E,thenc
f
.; u/D
f.u;/. Therefore, we havef
0
.; u/c
f
.; u/Df.u;/, and hence
.f"f
0
/.u; /Df.u;/Cf
0
.u; /f
0
.; u/(by equation (26.4))
f.u;/Cf
0
.u; /f.u;/(becausef
0
.; u/f.u;/)
Df
0
.u; /
0:
In addition,
.f"f
0
/.u; /
Df.u;/Cf
0
.u; /f
0
.; u/(by equation (26.4))
f.u;/Cf
0
.u; /(because flows are nonnegative)
f.u;/Cc
f
.u; /(capacity constraint)
Df.u;/Cc.u; /f.u;/(definition ofc
f
)
Dc.u; / :
For flow conservation, because bothfandf
0
obey flow conservation, we have
that for allu2V
f
s; t
g
,
X
2V
.f"f
0
/.u; /D
X
2V
.f .u; /Cf
0
.u; /f
0
.; u//
D
X
2V
f.u;/C
X
2V
f
0
.u; /
X
2V
f
0
.; u/
D
X
2V
f.;u/C
X
2V
f
0
.; u/
X
2V
f
0
.u; /
D
X
2V
.f .; u/Cf
0
.; u/f
0
.u; //
D
X
2V
.f"f
0
/.; u/ ;
where the third line follows from the second by flow conservation.
Finally,  we compute the value off"f
0
.  Recall that we disallow antiparallel
edges inG(but not inG
f
), and hence for each vertex2V, we know that there
can be an edge.s; /or.; s/, but never both.  We defineV
1
D
f
W.s; /2E
g
to be the set of vertices with edges froms,andV
2
D
f
W.; s/2E
g
to be the
set of vertices with edges tos.WehaveV
1
[V
2
Vand, because we disallow
antiparallel edges,V
1
\V
2
D;. We now compute
j
f"f
0
j
D
X
2V
.f"f
0
/.s;/
X
2V
.f"f
0
/.;s/
D
X
2V
1
.f"f
0
/.s;/
X
2V
2
.f"f
0
/.;s/ ;(26.5)

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method719
where the second line follows because.f"f
0
/.w; x/is0if.w; x/62E.Wenow
apply the definition off"f
0
to equation (26.5), and then reorder and group terms
to obtain
j
f"f
0
j
D
X
2V
1
.f .s; /Cf
0
.s; /f
0
.; s//
X
2V
2
.f .; s/Cf
0
.; s/f
0
.s; //
D
X
2V
1
f.s;/C
X
2V
1
f
0
.s; /
X
2V
1
f
0
.; s/

X
2V
2
f.;s/
X
2V
2
f
0
.; s/C
X
2V
2
f
0
.s; /
D
X
2V
1
f.s;/
X
2V
2
f.;s/
C
X
2V
1
f
0
.s; /C
X
2V
2
f
0
.s; /
X
2V
1
f
0
.; s/
X
2V
2
f
0
.; s/
D
X
2V
1
f.s;/
X
2V
2
f.;s/C
X
2V
1
[V
2
f
0
.s; /
X
2V
1
[V
2
f
0
.; s/ :(26.6)
In equation (26.6), we can extend all four summations to sum overV, since each
additional term has value0. (Exercise 26.2-1 asks you to prove this formally.) We
thus have
j
f"f
0
j
D
X
2V
f.s;/
X
2V
f.;s/C
X
2V
f
0
.s; /
X
2V
f
0
.; s/(26.7)
D
j
f
j
C
j
f
0
j
:
Augmenting paths
Given  a  flow  networkGD.V; E/and  a  flowf,anaugmenting pathpis  a
simple path fromstotin the residual networkG
f
. By the definition of the resid-
ual network, we may increase the flow on an edge.u; /of an augmenting path
by up toc
f
.u; /without violating the capacity constraint on whichever of.u; /
and.; u/is in the original flow networkG.
The shaded path in Figure 26.4(b) is an augmenting path.  Treating the residual
networkG
f
in the figure as a flow network, we can increase the flow through each
edge of this path by up to4units without violating a capacity constraint, since the
smallest residual capacity on this path isc
f
.
2
;
3
/D4.  We call the maximum
amount by which we can increase the flow on each edge in an augmenting pathp
theresidual capacityofp,givenby
c
f
.p/Dmin
f
c
f
.u; /W.u; /is onp
g
:

720Chapter 26Maximum Flow
The following lemma, whose proof we leave as Exercise 26.2-7, makes the above
argument more precise.
Lemma 26.2
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network, letfbe a flow inG,andletpbe an augmenting
path inG
f
. Define a functionf
p
WV	V!Rby
f
p
.u; /D
(
c
f
.p/if.u; /is onp;
0otherwise:
(26.8)
Then,f
p
isaflowinG
f
with value
j
f
p
j
Dc
f
.p/ > 0.
The following corollary shows that if we augmentfbyf
p
, we get another flow
inGwhose value is closer to the maximum.  Figure 26.4(c) shows the result of
augmenting the flowffrom Figure 26.4(a) by the flowf
p
in Figure 26.4(b), and
Figure 26.4(d) shows the ensuing residual network.
Corollary 26.3
LetGD.V; E/be  a  flow  network,  letfbe  a  flow  inG,andletpbe  an
augmenting  path  inG
f
.Letf
p
be  defined  as  in  equation  (26.8),  and  suppose
that  we augmentfbyf
p
.   Then the functionf"f
p
isaflowinGwith value
j
f"f
p
j
D
j
f
j
C
j
f
p
j
>
j
f
j
.
ProofImmediate from Lemmas 26.1 and 26.2.
Cuts of flow networks
The Ford-Fulkerson method repeatedly augments the flow along augmenting paths
until  it has found  a maximum flow.   How do we know  that  when the algorithm
terminates, we have actually found a maximum flow? The max-flow min-cut theo-
rem, which we shall prove shortly, tells us that a flow is maximum if and only if its
residual network contains no augmenting path. To prove this theorem, though, we
must first explore the notion of a cut of a flow network.
Acut.S; T /of  flow  networkGD.V; E/is  a  partition  ofVintoSand
TDVSsuch thats2Sandt2T.   (This definition  is similar to the def-
inition of “cut” that we used for minimum spanning  trees in Chapter 23,  except
that here we are cutting a directed graph rather than an undirected graph, and we
insist thats2Sandt2T.)  Iffis a flow, then thenet flowf.S;T/across the
cut.S; T /is defined to be
f.S;T/D
X
u2S
X
2T
f.u;/
X
u2S
X
2T
f.;u/:(26.9)

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method721
st
11/16
12/12
15/20
7/7
4/9
1/4
8/13
11/14
4/4
ST
v
4
v
3
v
1
v
2
Figure 26.5Acut.S; T /in  the  flow  network  of  Figure  26.1(b),  whereSD
f
s; 
1
;
2
g
and
TD
f

3
;
4
;t
g
.    The  vertices  inSare  black,  and  the  vertices  inTare  white.    The  net  flow
across.S; T /isf.S;T/D19, and the capacity isc.S; T /D26.
Thecapacityof the cut.S; T /is
c.S; T /D
X
u2S
X
2T
c.u; / :(26.10)
Aminimum cutof a network is a cut whose capacity is minimum over all cuts of
the network.
The asymmetry between the definitions of flow and capacity of a cut is inten-
tional and important.  For capacity,  we count only the capacities  of edges going
fromStoT, ignoring edges in the reverse direction.  For flow, we consider the
flow going fromStoTminus the flow going in the reverse direction fromTtoS.
The reason for this difference will become clear later in this section.
Figure 26.5 shows the cut.
f
s; 
1
;
2
g
;
f

3
;
4
;t
g
/in the flow network of Fig-
ure 26.1(b). The net flow across this cut is
f.
1
;
3
/Cf.
2
;
4
/f.
3
;
2
/D12C114
D19 ;
and the capacity of this cut is
c.
1
;
3
/Cc.
2
;
4
/D12C14
D26 :
The following lemma shows that, for a given flowf, the net flow across any cut
is the same, and it equals
j
f
j
, the value of the flow.
Lemma 26.4
Letfbe a flow in a flow networkGwith sourcesand sinkt,andlet.S; T /be any
cut ofG. Then the net flow across.S; T /isf.S;T/D
j
f
j
.

722Chapter 26Maximum Flow
ProofWe can rewrite the flow-conservation condition for any nodeu2V
f
s; t
g
as
X
2V
f.u;/
X
2V
f.;u/D0:(26.11)
Taking the definition of
j
f
j
from equation (26.1) and adding the left-hand side of
equation (26.11), which equals0, summed over all vertices inS
f
s
g
,gives
j
f
j
D
X
2V
f.s;/
X
2V
f.;s/C
X
u2Sfsg
 
X
2V
f.u;/
X
2V
f.;u/
!
:
Expanding the right-hand summation and regrouping terms yields
j
f
j
D
X
2V
f.s;/
X
2V
f.;s/C
X
u2Sfsg
X
2V
f.u;/
X
u2Sfsg
X
2V
f.;u/
D
X
2V
 
f.s;/C
X
u2Sfsg
f.u;/
!

X
2V
 
f.;s/C
X
u2Sfsg
f.;u/
!
D
X
2V
X
u2S
f.u;/
X
2V
X
u2S
f.;u/:
BecauseVDS[TandS\TD;, we can split each summation overVinto
summations overSandTto obtain
j
f
j
D
X
2S
X
u2S
f.u;/C
X
2T
X
u2S
f.u;/
X
2S
X
u2S
f.;u/
X
2T
X
u2S
f.;u/
D
X
2T
X
u2S
f.u;/
X
2T
X
u2S
f.;u/
C
 
X
2S
X
u2S
f.u;/
X
2S
X
u2S
f.;u/
!
:
The two summations  within  the parentheses  are actually  the same,  since  for  all
verticesx; y2V, the termf.x;y/appears once in each summation. Hence, these
summations cancel, and we have
j
f
j
D
X
u2S
X
2T
f.u;/
X
u2S
X
2T
f.;u/
Df.S;T/ :
A corollary to Lemma 26.4 shows how we can use cut capacities to bound the
value of a flow.

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method723
Corollary 26.5
The value of any flowfin a flow networkGis bounded from above by the capacity
of any cut ofG.
ProofLet.S; T /be any cut ofGand letfbe any flow. By Lemma 26.4 and the
capacity constraint,
j
f
j
Df.S;T/
D
X
u2S
X
2T
f.u;/
X
u2S
X
2T
f.;u/

X
u2S
X
2T
f.u;/

X
u2S
X
2T
c.u; /
Dc.S; T / :
Corollary 26.5 yields the immediate consequence that the value of a maximum
flow in a network  is bounded  from  above by the capacity  of  a minimum  cut  of
the network.  The important max-flow min-cut theorem, which we now state and
prove, says that the value of a maximum flow is in fact equal to the capacity of a
minimum cut.
Theorem 26.6 (Max-flow min-cut theorem)
Iffis a flow in a flow networkGD.V; E/with sourcesand sinkt, then the
following conditions are equivalent:
1.fis a maximum flow inG.
2.  The residual networkG
f
contains no augmenting paths.
3.
j
f
j
Dc.S; T /for some cut.S; T /ofG.
Proof.1/).2/:  Suppose for the sake of contradiction  thatfisamaximum
flow inGbut  thatG
f
has an augmenting  pathp.  Then,  by Corollary 26.3,  the
flow found by augmentingfbyf
p
,wheref
p
is given by equation (26.8), is a flow
inGwith value strictly greater than
j
f
j
, contradicting the assumption thatfis a
maximum flow.
.2/).3/:  Suppose thatG
f
has no augmenting path, that is, thatG
f
contains
no path fromstot.Define
SD
f
2VWthere exists a path fromstoinG
f
g
andTDVS.  The partition.S; T /isacut: wehaves2Strivially andt62S
because  there  is  no  path  fromstotinG
f
.   Now  consider  a  pair  of  vertices

724Chapter 26Maximum Flow
u2Sand2T.If.u; /2E,wemusthavef.u;/Dc.u; /,since
otherwise.u; /2E
f
,  which would placein setS.If.; u/2E,wemust
havef.;u/D0, because otherwisec
f
.u; /Df.;u/would be positive and
we would have.u; /2E
f
, which would placeinS. Of course, if neither.u; /
nor.; u/is inE,thenf.u;/Df.;u/D0. We thus have
f.S;T/D
X
u2S
X
2T
f.u;/
X
2T
X
u2S
f.;u/
D
X
u2S
X
2T
c.u; /
X
2T
X
u2S
0
Dc.S; T / :
By Lemma 26.4, therefore,
j
f
j
Df.S;T/Dc.S; T /.
.3/).1/: By Corollary 26.5,
j
f
j
c.S; T /for all cuts.S; T /. The condition
j
f
j
Dc.S; T /thus implies thatfisamaximumflow.
The basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm
In each iteration of the Ford-Fulkerson method, we findsomeaugmenting pathp
and usepto modify the flowf.  As Lemma 26.2 and Corollary 26.3 suggest, we
replacefbyf"f
p
, obtaining a new flow whose value is
j
f
j
C
j
f
p
j
. The follow-
ing implementation of the method computes the maximum flow in a flow network
GD.V; E/by  updating  the  flow  attribute.u; /:ffor  each  edge.u; /2E.
1
If.u; /62E, we assume implicitly that.u; /:fD0.  We also assume that we
are  given  the  capacitiesc.u; /along  with  the  flow  network,  andc.u; /D0
if.u; /62E.  We compute the residual capacityc
f
.u; /in accordance with the
formula (26.2).  The expressionc
f
.p/in the code is just a temporary variable that
stores the residual capacity of the pathp.
F
ORD-FULKERSON.G;s;t/
1foreach edge.u; /2G:E
2.u; /:fD0
3whilethere exists a pathpfromstotin the residual networkG
f
4c
f
.p/Dmin
f
c
f
.u; /W.u; /is inp
g
5foreach edge.u; /inp
6if.u; /2E
7.u; /:fD.u; /:fCc
f
.p/
8else.; u/:fD.; u/:fc
f
.p/
1
Recall from Section 22.1 that we represent an attributeffor edge.u; /with the same style of
notation—.u; /:f—that we use for an attribute of any other object.

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method725
The  FORD-FULKERSONalgorithm  simply  expands  on  the  FORD-FULKERSON-
M
ETHODpseudocode given earlier.  Figure 26.6 shows the result of each iteration
in a sample run.  Lines 1–2 initialize the flowfto0.Thewhileloop of lines 3–8
repeatedly  finds an augmenting  pathpinG
f
and augments  flowfalongpby
the residual capacityc
f
.p/.  Each residual edge in pathpis either an edge in the
original  network  or  the  reversal  of  an  edge  in  the  original  network.   Lines  6–8
update the flow in each case appropriately, adding flow when the residual edge is
an original edge and subtracting it otherwise. When no augmenting paths exist, the
flowfisamaximumflow.
Analysis of Ford-Fulkerson
The running time of F
ORD-FULKERSONdepends on how we find the augmenting
pathpin line 3. If we choose it poorly, the algorithm might not even terminate: the
value of the flow will increase with successive augmentations, but it need not even
converge to the maximum flow value.
2
If we find the augmenting path by using a
breadth-first search (which we saw in Section 22.2), however, the algorithm runs in
polynomial time. Before proving this result, we obtain a simple bound for the case
in which we choose the augmenting path arbitrarily and all capacities are integers.
In practice, the maximum-flow problem often arises with integral capacities.  If
the capacities are rational numbers, we can apply an appropriate scaling transfor-
mation to make them all integral. Iff

denotes a maximum flow in the transformed
network,  then a straightforward  implementation of  F
ORD-FULKERSONexecutes
thewhileloop of lines 3–8 at most
j
f

j
times, since the flow value increases by at
least one unit in each iteration.
We can perform the work done within thewhileloop efficiently if we implement
the flow networkGD.V; E/with the right data structure and find an augmenting
path by a linear-time algorithm.  Let us assume that we keep a data structure cor-
responding to a directed graphG
0
D.V; E
0
/,whereE
0
Df.u; /W.u; /2Eor
.; u/2Eg.  Edges in the networkGarealsoedgesinG
0
, and therefore we can
easily maintain capacities and flows in this data structure.  Given a flowfonG,
the edges in the residual  networkG
f
consist  of all edges.u; /ofG
0
such that
c
f
.u; /  >  0,wherec
f
conforms to equation (26.2).  The time to find a path in
a residual network is thereforeO.VCE
0
/DO.E/if we use either depth-first
search or breadth-first search.  Each iteration of thewhileloop thus takesO.E/
time, as does the initialization in lines 1–2, making the total running time of the
F
ORD-FULKERSONalgorithmO.E
j
f

j
/.
2
The Ford-Fulkerson method might fail to terminate only if edge capacities are irrational numbers.

726Chapter 26Maximum Flow
12
4
4
4/4
4
v
1
4
16
4
10
st
16
12
20
7
9
4
13
14
4
v
1
st
4/16
4/12
20
7
4/9
13
4/14
4/4
st
7
5
4
4
v
1
8
4
13
20
v
1
st
4/16
8/12
4/20
7
4/9
4/13
4/14
4/4
4
10
st
7
5
8
4
v
1
4
9
v
1
st
8/16
8/12
8/20
7
9
4/13
4/14
4/4
v
2
v
2
v
2
v
2
v
2
v
2
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
4
v
4
v
4
v
4
v
4
v
4
(b)
(a)
(c)
12
4
4
4
4
4
Figure 26.6The execution of the basic Ford-Fulkerson algorithm.(a)–(e)Successive iterations of
thewhileloop.  The left side of each part shows the residual networkG
f
from line 3 with a shaded
augmenting pathp. The right side of each part shows the new flowfthat results from augmentingf
byf
p
. The residual network in (a) is the input networkG.
When the capacities are integral and the optimal flow value
j
f

j
is small, the
running time of the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm is good. Figure 26.7(a) shows an ex-
ample of what can happen on a simple flow network for which
j
f

j
is large. A max-
imum flow in this network has value 2,000,000:  1,000,000 units of flow traverse
the paths!u!t, and another 1,000,000 units traverse the paths!!t.If
the first augmenting path found by F
ORD-FULKERSONiss!u!!t,shown
in Figure 26.7(a), the flow has value1after the first iteration.  The resulting resid-
ual network appears in Figure 26.7(b).  If the second iteration finds the augment-
ing paths!!u!t, as shown in Figure 26.7(b), the flow then has value2.
Figure 26.7(c) shows the resulting residual network.  We can continue,  choosing
the augmenting paths!u!!tin the odd-numbered iterations and the aug-
menting paths!!u!tin the even-numbered iterations. We would perform
a total of 2,000,000 augmentations, increasing the flow value by only1unit in each.

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method727
4
12
11
2
11
2
8
8
9
4
4
9
8
4
4
9
8
st
12
7
4
4
v
1
st
8/16
8/12
15/20
7/7
9
11/13
11/14
4/4
v
1
10
19
st
12
1
7
11
4
3
v
2
v
3
v
3
v
3
v
4
v
4
v
4
(d)
(f)
4
9
8
4
4
15
st
5
7
11
4
v
1
st
12/16
12/12
19/20
7/7
9
11/13
11/14
4/4
v
1
3
v
2
v
3
v
3
v
4
v
4
(e)
4
v
2
v
2
v
1
v
2
8
8
Figure 26.6, continued  (f)The residual network at the lastwhileloop test.  It has no augmenting
paths, and the flowfshown in (e) is therefore a maximum flow.  The value of the maximum flow
found is23.
The Edmonds-Karp algorithm
We  can  improve  the  bound  on  F
ORD-FULKERSONby  finding  the  augmenting
pathpin line 3 with a breadth-first  search.   That is,  we choose the augmenting
path as ashortestpath fromstotin the residual network, where each edge has
unit  distance  (weight).   We call  the Ford-Fulkerson  method  so implemented  the
Edmonds-Karp algorithm.  We now prove that the Edmonds-Karp algorithm runs
inO.VE
2
/time.
The analysis depends on the distances to vertices in the residual  networkG
f
.
The  following  lemma  uses  the  notationı
f
.u; /for  the  shortest-path  distance
fromutoinG
f
, where each edge has unit distance.
Lemma 26.7
If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow networkGD.V; E/with sources
and sinkt, then for all vertices2V
f
s; t
g
, the shortest-path distanceı
f
.s; /
in the residual networkG
f
increases monotonically with each flow augmentation.

728Chapter 26Maximum Flow
1
999,999
999,999
1
st
1,000,000
1,000,000
1
1,000,000
1,000,000
999,999
1
1
999,999
u
v
st
1,000,000
1
1,000,000
u
v
999,999
1
999,999
1
st
1
u
v
(a)(b)(c)
Figure 26.7  (a)A  flow  network  for  which  FORD-FULKERSONcan  take‚.E
j
f

j
/time,
wheref

is a maximum flow,  shown here with
j
f

j
D2,000,000.   The shaded path is an aug-
menting path with residual capacity1.(b)The resulting residual network, with another augmenting
path whose residual capacity is1.(c)The resulting residual network.
ProofWe will suppose that for some vertex2V
f
s; t
g
, there is a flow aug-
mentation that causes the shortest-path distance fromstoto decrease, and then
we will derive a contradiction. Letfbe the flow just before the first augmentation
that decreases some shortest-path distance, and letf
0
be the flow just afterward.
Letbe the vertex with the minimumı
f
0
.s; /whose distance was decreased by
the augmentation, so thatı
f
0
.s; / < ı
f
.s; /.LetpDsu!be a shortest
path fromstoinG
f
0
,sothat.u; /2E
f
0
and
ı
f
0
.s; u/Dı
f
0
.s; /1:(26.12)
Because of how we chose, we know that the distance of vertexufrom the sources
did not decrease, i.e.,
ı
f
0
.s; u/ı
f
.s; u/ :(26.13)
We claim that.u; /62E
f
. Why? If we had.u; /2E
f
,thenwewouldalsohave
ı
f
.s; /ı
f
.s; u/C1(by Lemma 24.10, the triangle inequality)
ı
f
0
.s; u/C1(by inequality (26.13))
Dı
f
0
.s; /(by equation (26.12))  ,
which contradicts our assumption thatı
f
0
.s; / < ı
f
.s; /.
How  can  we  have.u; /62E
f
and.u; /2E
f
0
?   The  augmentation  must
have increased the flow fromtou.  The Edmonds-Karp algorithm always aug-
ments flow along shortest paths, and therefore the shortest path fromstouinG
f
has.; u/as its last edge. Therefore,
ı
f
.s; /Dı
f
.s; u/1
ı
f
0
.s; u/1(by inequality (26.13))
Dı
f
0
.s; /2(by equation (26.12))  ,

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method729
which contradicts our assumption thatı
f
0
.s; / < ı
f
.s; /.  We conclude that our
assumption that such a vertexexists is incorrect.
The next theorem bounds the number of iterations of the Edmonds-Karp algo-
rithm.
Theorem 26.8
If the Edmonds-Karp algorithm is run on a flow networkGD.V; E/with sources
and sinkt, then the total number of flow augmentations performed by the algorithm
isO.VE/.
ProofWe say that an edge.u; /in a residual networkG
f
iscriticalon an aug-
menting pathpif the residual capacity ofpis the residual capacity of.u; /,that
is, ifc
f
.p/Dc
f
.u; /. After we have augmented flow along an augmenting path,
any critical edge on the path disappears from the residual network.  Moreover, at
least one edge on any augmenting path must be critical. We will show that each of
the
j
E
j
edges can become critical at most
j
V
j
=2times.
Letuandbe vertices inVthat are connected by an edge inE. Since augment-
ing paths are shortest paths, when.u; /is critical for the first time, we have
ı
f
.s; /Dı
f
.s; u/C1:
Once the flow is augmented, the edge.u; /disappears from the residual network.
It cannot reappear later on another augmenting path until after the flow fromuto
is decreased, which occurs only if.; u/appears on an augmenting path.  Iff
0
is
the flow inGwhen this event occurs, then we have
ı
f
0
.s; u/Dı
f
0
.s; /C1:
Sinceı
f
.s; /ı
f
0
.s; /by Lemma 26.7, we have
ı
f
0
.s; u/Dı
f
0
.s; /C1
ı
f
.s; /C1
Dı
f
.s; u/C2:
Consequently,  from  the time.u; /becomes  critical  to the  time when it next
becomes critical,  the distance ofufrom the source increases  by at least2.The
distance ofufrom the source is initially at least0.  The intermediate vertices on a
shortest path fromstoucannot contains,u,ort(since.u; /on an augmenting
path implies thatu¤t). Therefore, untilubecomes unreachable from the source,
if ever, its distance is at most
j
V
j
2. Thus, after the first time that.u; /becomes
critical, it can become critical at most.
j
V
j
2/=2D
j
V
j
=21times more, for a
total of at most
j
V
j
=2times. Since there areO.E/pairs of vertices that can have an
edge between them in a residual network, the total number of critical edges during

730Chapter 26Maximum Flow
the entire execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm isO.VE/. Each augmenting
path has at least one critical edge, and hence the theorem follows.
Because we can implement each iteration of FORD-FULKERSONinO.E/time
when we find the augmenting path by breadth-first search, the total running time of
the Edmonds-Karp algorithm isO.VE
2
/. We shall see that push-relabel algorithms
can yield even better bounds.  The algorithm of Section 26.4 gives a method for
achieving  anO.V
2
E/running  time,  which forms the basis  for  theO.V
3
/-time
algorithm of Section 26.5.
Exercises
26.2-1
Prove  that  the  summations  in  equation  (26.6)  equal  the  summations  in  equa-
tion (26.7).
26.2-2
In Figure 26.1(b), what is the flow across the cut.
f
s; 
2
;
4
g
;
f

1
;
3
;t
g
/?Whatis
the capacity of this cut?
26.2-3
Show the execution of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm on the flow network of Fig-
ure 26.1(a).
26.2-4
In the example of Figure 26.6, what is the minimum cut corresponding to the max-
imum flow shown? Of the augmenting paths appearing in the example, which one
cancels flow?
26.2-5
Recall that the construction in Section 26.1 that converts a flow network with mul-
tiple sources and sinks into a single-source,  single-sink network adds edges with
infinite capacity.   Prove that any flow in the resulting  network has a finite value
if  the edges  of  the  original  network  with  multiple  sources  and sinks  have  finite
capacity.
26.2-6
Suppose  that  each  sources
i
in  a  flow  network  with  multiple  sources  and  sinks
produces  exactlyp
i
units  of  flow,  so  that
P
2V
f.s
i
;/Dp
i
.   Suppose  also
that each sinkt
j
consumes exactlyq
j
units,  so that
P
2V
f.;t
j
/Dq
j
,where
P
i
p
i
D
P
j
q
j
. Show how to convert the problem of finding a flowfthat obeys

26.2The Ford-Fulkerson method731
these additional constraints into the problem of finding a maximum flow in a single-
source, single-sink flow network.
26.2-7
Prove Lemma 26.2.
26.2-8
Suppose that we redefine the residual network to disallow edges intos. Argue that
the procedure F
ORD-FULKERSONstill correctly computes a maximum flow.
26.2-9
Suppose that bothfandf
0
are flows in a networkGand we compute flowf"f
0
.
Does the augmented flow satisfy the flow conservation property?  Does it satisfy
the capacity constraint?
26.2-10
Show how to find a maximum flow in a networkGD.V; E/by a sequence of at
most
j
E
j
augmenting paths. (Hint:Determine the pathsafterfinding the maximum
flow.)
26.2-11
Theedge connectivityof an undirected graph is the minimum numberkof edges
that must be removed to disconnect the graph. For example, the edge connectivity
of a tree is1, and the edge connectivity of a cyclic chain of vertices is2.Show
how to determine the edge connectivity  of an undirected  graphGD.V; E/by
running  a maximum-flow  algorithm  on at  most
j
V
j
flow networks,  each  having
O.V /vertices andO.E/edges.
26.2-12
Suppose  that  you  are  given  a  flow  networkG,andGhas  edges  entering  the
sources.Letfbe a flow inGin which one of the edges.; s/entering the source
hasf.;s/D1.  Prove that there must exist another flowf
0
withf
0
.; s/D0
such that
j
f
j
D
j
f
0
j
.GiveanO.E/-time algorithm to computef
0
,givenf,and
assuming that all edge capacities are integers.
26.2-13
Suppose that you wish to find, among all minimum cuts in a flow networkGwith
integral capacities, one that contains the smallest number of edges.  Show how to
modify the capacities ofGto create a new flow networkG
0
in which any minimum
cut inG
0
is a minimum cut with the smallest number of edges inG.

732Chapter 26Maximum Flow
26.3  Maximum bipartite matching
Some combinatorial problems can easily be cast as maximum-flow problems. The
multiple-source, multiple-sink maximum-flow problem from Section 26.1 gave us
one example. Some other combinatorial problems seem on the surface to have little
to do with flow networks, but can in fact be reduced to maximum-flow problems.
This section presents one such problem: finding a maximum matching in a bipartite
graph.   In order to solve this problem,  we shall take advantage  of an integrality
property  provided by the Ford-Fulkerson  method.  We shall also see how to use
the Ford-Fulkerson method to solve the maximum-bipartite-matching problem on
agraphGD.V; E/inO.VE/time.
The maximum-bipartite-matching problem
Given an undirected graphGD.V; E/,amatchingis a subset of edgesME
such  that  for all vertices2V,  at  most  one  edge ofMis incident  on.We
say  that a vertex2Vismatchedby the matchingMif  some edge  inMis
incident on; otherwise,isunmatched.Amaximum matchingis a matching
of maximum cardinality,  that is,  a matchingMsuch that  for any matchingM
0
,
we  have
j
M
j

j
M
0
j
.   In  this  section,  we  shall  restrict  our  attention  to  finding
maximum  matchings  in  bipartite  graphs:  graphs  in  which  the vertex  set  can  be
partitioned  intoVDL[R,whereLandRare  disjoint  and  all  edges  inE
go betweenLandR.  We further assume that every vertex inVhas at least one
incident edge. Figure 26.8 illustrates the notion of a matching in a bipartite graph.
The  problem  of  finding  a  maximum  matching  in  a  bipartite  graph  has  many
practical applications. As an example, we might consider matching a setLof ma-
chines with a setRof tasks to be performed simultaneously. We take the presence
of edge.u; /inEto mean that a particular machineu2Lis capable of per-
forming a particular task2R. A maximum matching provides work for as many
machines as possible.
Finding a maximum bipartite matching
We can use the Ford-Fulkerson method to find a maximum matching in an undi-
rected bipartite graphGD.V; E/in time polynomial in
j
V
j
and
j
E
j
. The trick is
to construct a flow network in which flows correspond to matchings, as shown in
Figure 26.8(c).  We define thecorresponding flow networkG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/for the
bipartite graphGas follows.  We let the sourcesand sinktbe new vertices not
inV,andweletV
0
DV[
f
s; t
g
.  If the vertex partition ofGisVDL[R,the

26.3Maximum bipartite matching733
LRLR
st
(a)(c)
LR
(b)
Figure 26.8A bipartite graphGD.V; E/with vertex partitionVDL[R.(a)A matching
with cardinality2, indicated by shaded edges.(b)A maximum matching with cardinality3.(c)The
corresponding flow networkG
0
with a maximum flow shown.  Each edge has unit capacity.  Shaded
edges have a flow of1, and all other edges carry no flow. The shaded edges fromLtoRcorrespond
to those in the maximum matching from (b).
directed edges ofG
0
are the edges ofE, directed fromLtoR, along with
j
V
j
new
directed edges:
E
0
D
f
.s; u/Wu2L
g
[
f
.u; /W.u; /2E
g
[
f
.; t /W2R
g
:
To complete the construction,  we assign unit capacity to each edge inE
0
.Since
each vertex inVhas at least one incident edge,
j
E
j

j
V
j
=2. Thus,
j
E
j

j
E
0
j
D
j
E
j
C
j
V
j
3
j
E
j
,andso
j
E
0
j
D‚.E/.
The following lemma shows that a matching inGcorresponds directly to a flow
inG’s corresponding flow networkG
0
.  We say that a flowfon a flow network
GD.V; E/isinteger-valuediff.u;/is an integer for all.u; /2V	V.
Lemma 26.9
LetGD.V; E/be a bipartite graph with vertex partitionVDL[R,andlet
G
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/be its corresponding flow network.  IfMis a matching inG,then
there is an integer-valued flowfinG
0
with value
j
f
j
D
j
M
j
.  Conversely, iff
is an integer-valued flow inG
0
, then there is a matchingMinGwith cardinality
j
M
j
D
j
f
j
.
ProofWe first show that a matchingMinGcorresponds to an integer-valued
flowfinG
0
.Definefas follows.  If.u; /2M,thenf.s;u/Df.u;/D
f.;t/D1.  For all other edges.u; /2E
0
,wedefinef.u;/D0.Itissimple
to verify thatfsatisfies the capacity constraint and flow conservation.

734Chapter 26Maximum Flow
Intuitively,  each edge.u; /2Mcorresponds  to one unit  of flow inG
0
that
traverses the paths!u!!t.  Moreover, the paths induced by edges inM
are vertex-disjoint, except forsandt.  The net flow across cut.L[
f
s
g
;R[
f
t
g
/
is equal to
j
M
j
; thus, by Lemma 26.4, the value of the flow is
j
f
j
D
j
M
j
.
To prove the converse, letfbe an integer-valued flow inG
0
,andlet
MD
f
.u; /Wu2L; 2R;andf.u;/ > 0
g
:
Each vertexu2Lhas only  one entering  edge,  namely.s; u/,  and its capacity
is1.  Thus, eachu2Lhas at most one unit of flow entering it, and if one unit of
flow does enter, by flow conservation,  one unit of flow must leave.  Furthermore,
sincefis integer-valued, for eachu2L, the one unit of flow can enter on at most
one edge and can leave on at most one edge. Thus, one unit of flow entersuif and
only if there is exactly one vertex2Rsuch thatf.u;/D1, and at most one
edge leaving eachu2Lcarries positive flow.  A symmetric argument applies to
each2R. The setMis therefore a matching.
To see that
j
M
j
D
j
f
j
, observe that for every matched vertexu2L,wehave
f.s;u/D1, and for every edge.u; /2EM,wehavef.u;/D0.  Conse-
quently,f.L[
f
s
g
;R[
f
t
g
/, the net flow across cut.L
[
f
s
g
;R[
f
t
g
/, is equal
to
j
M
j
. Applying Lemma 26.4, we have that
j
f
j
Df.L[
f
s
g
;R[
f
t
g
/D
j
M
j
.
Based on Lemma 26.9,  we would like to conclude that a maximum matching
in a bipartite graphGcorresponds to a maximum flow in its corresponding flow
networkG
0
, and we can therefore compute a maximum matching inGby running
a  maximum-flow  algorithm  onG
0
.   The  only  hitch  in  this  reasoning  is  that  the
maximum-flow  algorithm  might  return  a  flow  inG
0
for  which  somef.u;/is
not an integer, even though the flow value
j
f
j
must be an integer.  The following
theorem  shows that  if  we use  the Ford-Fulkerson  method,  this  difficulty  cannot
arise.
Theorem 26.10 (Integrality theorem)
If the capacity functionctakes on only integral values, then the maximum flowf
produced  by the Ford-Fulkerson  method  has the property  that
j
f
j
is an integer.
Moreover, for all verticesuand,thevalueoff.u;/is an integer.
ProofThe  proof  is  by  induction  on  the  number  of  iterations.   We  leave  it  as
Exercise 26.3-2.
We can now prove the following corollary to Lemma 26.9.

26.3Maximum bipartite matching735
Corollary 26.11
The cardinality of a maximum matchingMin a bipartite graphGequals the value
of a maximum flowfin its corresponding flow networkG
0
.
ProofWe use the nomenclature from Lemma 26.9.  Suppose thatMisamax-
imum matching inGand that the corresponding  flowfinG
0
is not maximum.
Then  there  is  a  maximum  flowf
0
inG
0
such  that
j
f
0
j
>
j
f
j
.   Since  the  ca-
pacities  inG
0
are  integer-valued,  by  Theorem  26.10,  we can  assume  thatf
0
is
integer-valued.   Thus,f
0
corresponds  to  a  matchingM
0
inGwith  cardinality
j
M
0
j
D
j
f
0
j
>
j
f
j
D
j
M
j
, contradicting our assumption thatMis a maximum
matching. In a similar manner, we can show that iffis a maximum flow inG
0
, its
corresponding matching is a maximum matching onG.
Thus, given a bipartite undirected graphG, we can find a maximum matching by
creating the flow networkG
0
, running the Ford-Fulkerson method, and directly ob-
taining a maximum matchingMfrom the integer-valued maximum flowffound.
Since any matching in a bipartite graph has cardinality at most min.L; R/DO.V /,
the value of the maximum flow inG
0
isO.V /. We can therefore find a maximum
matching in a bipartite graph in timeO.VE
0
/DO.VE/,since
j
E
0
j
D‚.E/.
Exercises
26.3-1
Run the Ford-Fulkerson algorithm on the flow network in Figure 26.8(c) and show
the residual network after each flow augmentation.  Number the vertices inLtop
to bottom from1to5and inRtop to bottom from6to9. For each iteration, pick
the augmenting path that is lexicographically smallest.
26.3-2
Prove Theorem 26.10.
26.3-3
LetGD.V; E/be a bipartite graph with vertex partitionVDL[R,andletG
0
be its corresponding flow network.  Give a good upper bound on the length of any
augmenting path found inG
0
during the execution of FORD-FULKERSON.
26.3-4?
Aperfect matchingis a matching  in which every vertex is matched.   LetGD
.V; E/be an undirected bipartite graph with vertex partitionVDL[R,where
j
L
j
D
j
R
j
.ForanyXV,definetheneighborhoodofXas
N.X/D
f
y2VW.x; y/2Efor somex2X
g
;

736Chapter 26Maximum Flow
that is, the set of vertices adjacent to some member ofX.  ProveHall’s theorem:
there exists a perfect matching inGif and only if
j
A
j

j
N.A/
j
for every subset
AL.
26.3-5?
We say that a bipartite graphGD.V; E/,whereVDL[R,isd-regularif every
vertex2Vhas degree exactlyd.Everyd-regular bipartite graph has
j
L
j
D
j
R
j
.
Prove  that  everyd-regular  bipartite  graph  has  a  matching  of  cardinality
j
L
j
by
arguing that a minimum cut of the corresponding flow network has capacity
j
L
j
.
?26.4  Push-relabel algorithms
In this section,  we present  the “push-relabel”  approach  to computing  maximum
flows.  To date, many of the asymptotically fastest maximum-flow algorithms are
push-relabel algorithms, and the fastest actual implementations of maximum-flow
algorithms are based on the push-relabel method.  Push-relabel methods also effi-
ciently solve other flow problems, such as the minimum-cost flow problem.  This
section  introduces  Goldberg’s  “generic”  maximum-flow  algorithm,  which  has  a
simple  implementation  that  runs  inO.V
2
E/time,  thereby  improving  upon  the
O.VE
2
/bound of the Edmonds-Karp algorithm.  Section 26.5 refines the generic
algorithm to obtain another push-relabel algorithm that runs inO.V
3
/time.
Push-relabel  algorithms  work  in  a  more  localized  manner  than  the  Ford-
Fulkerson method. Rather than examine the entire residual network to find an aug-
menting path, push-relabel algorithms work on one vertex at a time, looking only
at the vertex’s neighbors in the residual  network.  Furthermore,  unlike the Ford-
Fulkerson method, push-relabel algorithms do not maintain the flow-conservation
property throughout their execution. They do, however, maintain apreflow,which
is a functionfWV	V!Rthat satisfies the capacity constraint and the following
relaxation of flow conservation:
X
2V
f.;u/
X
2V
f.u;/0
for all verticesu2V
f
s
g
.  That is, the flow into a vertex may exceed the flow
out. We call the quantity
e.u/D
X
2V
f.;u/
X
2V
f.u;/(26.14)
theexcess flowinto vertexu.  The excess at a vertex is the amount by which the
flow in exceeds the flow out. We say that a vertexu2V
f
s; t
g
isoverflowingif
e.u/ > 0.

26.4Push-relabel algorithms737
We shall begin this section by describing the intuition behind the push-relabel
method.   We shall then investigate  the two operations  employed  by the method:
“pushing” preflow and “relabeling”  a vertex.  Finally,  we shall present a generic
push-relabel algorithm and analyze its correctness and running time.
Intuition
You can understand the intuition behind the push-relabel method in terms of fluid
flows:  we consider a flow networkGD.V; E/to be a system of interconnected
pipes of given capacities.   Applying this analogy to the Ford-Fulkerson  method,
we might say that each augmenting path in the network gives rise to an additional
stream of fluid, with no branch points, flowing from the source to the sink.  The
Ford-Fulkerson method iteratively adds more streams of flow until no more can be
added.
The generic push-relabel algorithm has a rather different intuition.  As before,
directed edges correspond to pipes.  Vertices, which are pipe junctions, have two
interesting properties.  First, to accommodate excess flow, each vertex has an out-
flow pipe leading to an arbitrarily large reservoir that can accumulate fluid. Second,
each vertex, its reservoir, and all its pipe connections sit on a platform whose height
increases as the algorithm progresses.
Vertex heights determine how flow is pushed:  we push flow only downhill, that
is, from a higher vertex to a lower vertex. The flow from a lower vertex to a higher
vertex may be positive, but operations that push flow push it only downhill.  We
fix the height of the source at
j
V
j
and the height of the sink at0.  All other vertex
heights start at0and increase with time. The algorithm first sends as much flow as
possible downhill from the source toward the sink.  The amount it sends is exactly
enough to fill each outgoing pipe from the source to capacity; that is, it sends the
capacity of the cut.s; V
f
s
g
/.  When flow first enters an intermediate vertex, it
collects in the vertex’s reservoir. From there, we eventually push it downhill.
We may eventually  find that  the only  pipes  that  leave  a vertexuand  are not
already saturated with flow connect to vertices that are on the same level asuor
are uphill fromu. In this case, to rid an overflowing vertexuof its excess flow, we
must increase its height—an operation called “relabeling” vertexu.  We increase
its height to one unit more than the height of the lowest of its neighbors to which
it has an unsaturated pipe.  After a vertex is relabeled, therefore, it has at least one
outgoing pipe through which we can push more flow.
Eventually, all the flow that can possibly get through to the sink has arrived there.
No more can arrive, because the pipes obey the capacity constraints; the amount of
flow across any cut is still limited by the capacity of the cut.  To make the preflow
a “legal” flow, the algorithm then sends the excess collected  in the reservoirs  of
overflowing vertices back to the source by continuing to relabel vertices to above

738Chapter 26Maximum Flow
the fixed height
j
V
j
of the source.  As we shall see, once we have emptied all the
reservoirs, the preflow is not only a “legal” flow, it is also a maximum flow.
The basic operations
From the preceding discussion, we see that a push-relabel algorithm performs two
basic operations:  pushing  flow excess from a vertex to one of its neighbors  and
relabeling a vertex.  The situations in which these operations apply depend on the
heights of vertices, which we now define precisely.
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt,andletfbe a
preflow  inG.   A  functionhWV!Nis  aheight function
3
ifh.s/D
j
V
j
,
h.t /D0,and
h.u/h./C1
for every residual edge.u; /2E
f
. We immediately obtain the following lemma.
Lemma 26.12
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network, letfbe a preflow inG,andlethbe a height
function onV.  For any two verticesu; 2V,ifh.u/ > h./C1,then.u; /is
not an edge in the residual network.
The push operation
The basic operation P
USH.u; /applies ifuis an overflowing vertex,c
f
.u; / > 0,
andh.u/Dh./C1. The pseudocode below updates the preflowfand the excess
flows foruand.  It assumes that we can compute residual capacityc
f
.u; /in
constant time givencandf.  We maintain the excess flow stored at a vertexuas
the attributeu:eand the height ofuas the attributeu:h. The expression
f
.u; /
is a temporary variable that stores the amount of flow that we can push fromuto.
3
In the literature, a height function is typically called a “distance function,” and the height of a vertex
is called a “distance label.”  We use the term “height” because it is more suggestive of the intuition
behind the algorithm.  We retain the use of the term “relabel” to refer to the operation that increases
the height of a vertex.  The height of a vertex is related to its distance from the sinkt, as would be
found in a breadth-first search of the transposeG
T
.

26.4Push-relabel algorithms739
PUSH.u; /
1//Applies when:uis overflowing,c
f
.u; / > 0,andu:hD:hC1.
2//Action:Push
f
.u; /Dmin.u:e;c
f
.u; //units of flow fromuto.
3
f
.u; /Dmin.u:e;c
f
.u; //
4if.u; /2E
5.u; /:fD.u; /:fC
f
.u; /
6else.; u/:fD.; u/:f
f
.u; /
7u:eDu:e
f
.u; /
8:eD:eC
f
.u; /
The code for P
USHoperates as follows. Because vertexuhas a positive excessu:e
and the residual capacity of.u; /is positive, we can increase the flow fromuto
by
f
.u; /Dmin.u:e;c
f
.u; //without causingu:eto become negative or the
capacityc.u; /to be exceeded. Line 3 computes the value
f
.u; /, and lines 4–6
updatef.  Line 5 increases the flow on edge.u; /, because we are pushing flow
over a residual  edge that is also an original  edge.   Line 6 decreases  the flow on
edge.; u/,  because  the  residual  edge  is  actually  the  reverse  of  an  edge  in  the
original network.  Finally, lines 7–8 update the excess flows into verticesuand.
Thus, iffis a preflow before P
USHis called, it remains a preflow afterward.
Observe that nothing in the code for P
USHdepends on the heights ofuand,
yet we prohibit it from being invoked unlessu:hD:hC1. Thus, we push excess
flow downhill  only  by a height  differential  of1.   By Lemma 26.12,  no residual
edges exist between two vertices whose heights differ by more than1, and thus,
as long as the attributehis indeed a height function,  we would gain nothing by
allowing flow to be pushed downhill by a height differential of more than1.
We call the operation P
USH.u; /apushfromuto.  If a push operation ap-
plies to some edge.u; /leaving a vertexu, we also say that the push operation
applies tou.Itisasaturating pushif edge.u; /in the residual network becomes
saturated(c
f
.u; /D0afterward); otherwise, it is anonsaturating push.Ifan
edge becomes saturated, it disappears from the residual network. A simple lemma
characterizes one result of a nonsaturating push.
Lemma 26.13
After a nonsaturating push fromuto, the vertexuis no longer overflowing.
ProofSince the push was nonsaturating,  the amount of flow
f
.u; /actually
pushed must equalu:eprior to the push.  Sinceu:eis reduced by this amount, it
becomes0after the push.

740Chapter 26Maximum Flow
The relabel operation
The basic operation R
ELABEL.u/applies ifuis overflowing and ifu:h:hfor
all edges.u; /2E
f
.  In other words, we can relabel an overflowing vertexuif
for every vertexfor which there is residual capacity fromuto, flow cannot be
pushed fromutobecauseis not downhill fromu.  (Recall that by definition,
neither the sourcesnor the sinktcan be overflowing, and sosandtare ineligible
for relabeling.)
R
ELABEL.u/
1//Applies when:uis overflowing and for all2Vsuch that.u; /2E
f
,
we haveu:h:h.
2//Action:Increase the height ofu.
3u:hD1Cmin
f
:hW.u; /2E
f
g
When we call the operation R
ELABEL.u/, we say that vertexuisrelabeled.Note
that whenuis relabeled,E
f
must contain at least one edge that leavesu,sothat
the minimization in the code is over a nonempty set.  This property follows from
the assumption thatuis overflowing, which in turn tells us that
u:eD
X
2V
f.;u/
X
2V
f.u;/ > 0:
Since all flows are nonnegative, we must therefore have at least one vertexsuch
that.; u/:f>0.Butthen,c
f
.u; / > 0, which implies that.u; /2E
f
.The
operation R
ELABEL.u/thus givesuthe greatest height allowed by the constraints
on height functions.
The generic algorithm
The generic push-relabel algorithm uses the following subroutine to create an ini-
tial preflow in the flow network.
I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOW.G; s/
1foreach vertex2G:V
2:hD0
3:eD0
4foreach edge.u; /2G:E
5.u; /:fD0
6s:hD
j
G:V
j
7foreach vertex2s:Adj
8.s; /:fDc.s; /
9:eDc.s; /
10s:eDs:ec.s; /

26.4Push-relabel algorithms741
INITIALIZE-PREFLOWcreates an initial preflowfdefined by
.u; /:fD
(
c.u; /ifuDs;
0otherwise:
(26.15)
That is, we fill to capacity each edge leaving the sources, and all other edges carry
no flow.  For each vertexadjacent to the source, we initially have:eDc.s; /,
and we initializes:eto the negative of the sum of these capacities.  The generic
algorithm also begins with an initial height functionh,givenby
u:hD
(
j
V
j
ifuDs;
0otherwise:
(26.16)
Equation (26.16) defines a height function because the only edges.u; /for which
u:h>:hC1are those for whichuDs, and those edges are saturated, which
means that they are not in the residual network.
Initialization, followed by a sequence of push and relabel operations, executed
in no particular order, yields the G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELalgorithm:
G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABEL.G/
1I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOW.G; s/
2whilethere exists an applicable push or relabel operation
3select an applicable push or relabel operation and perform it
The following lemma tells us that as long as an overflowing vertex exists, at least
one of the two basic operations applies.
Lemma 26.14 (An overflowing vertex can be either pushed or relabeled)
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt,letfbeapreflow,
and lethbe any height function forf.Ifuis any overflowing vertex, then either a
push or relabel operation applies to it.
ProofFor any residual  edge.u; /,wehaveh.u/h./C1becausehis a
height  function.   If a push operation  does not apply to an overflowing vertexu,
then for all residual edges.u; /,wemusthaveh.u/ < h./C1, which implies
h.u/h./. Thus, a relabel operation applies tou.
Correctness of the push-relabel method
To show that the generic push-relabel  algorithm solves the maximum-flow prob-
lem, we shall first prove that if it terminates,  the preflowfis a maximum flow.
We shall later prove that it terminates.  We start with some observations about the
height functionh.

742Chapter 26Maximum Flow
Lemma 26.15 (Vertex heights never decrease)
During the execution of the G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELprocedure on a flow net-
workGD.V; E/, for each vertexu2V, the heightu:hnever decreases.  More-
over, whenever a relabel operation is applied to a vertexu, its heightu:hincreases
by at least1.
ProofBecause vertex heights change only during relabel operations,  it suffices
to  prove  the  second  statement  of  the  lemma.   If  vertexuis  about  to  be  rela-
beled,  then for all verticessuch that.u; /2E
f
,wehaveu:h:h.  Thus,
u:h<1Cmin
f
:hW.u; /2E
f
g
, and so the operation must increaseu:h.
Lemma 26.16
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt. Then the execution of
G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELonGmaintains the attributehas a height function.
ProofThe proof is by induction on the number of basic operations performed.
Initially,his a height function, as we have already observed.
We claim that ifhis a height function, then an operation R
ELABEL.u/leavesh
a height function.  If we look at a residual edge.u; /2E
f
that leavesu,then
the operation R
ELABEL.u/ensures thatu:h:hC1afterward.  Now consider
a residual edge.w; u/that entersu.  By Lemma 26.15,w:hu:hC1before the
operation  R
ELABEL.u/impliesw:h<u:hC1afterward.   Thus,  the operation
R
ELABEL.u/leavesha height function.
Now, consider an operation P
USH.u; /. This operation may add the edge.; u/
toE
f
,  and  it  may  remove.u; /fromE
f
.In  the  former  case,   we  have
:hDu:h1<u:hC1,andsohremains a height function.  In the latter case,
removing.u; /from the residual network removes the corresponding constraint,
andhagain remains a height function.
The following lemma gives an important property of height functions.
Lemma 26.17
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt,letfbeapreflow
inG,andlethbe a height function onV. Then there is no path from the sources
to the sinktin the residual networkG
f
.
ProofAssume for the sake of contradiction thatG
f
contains a pathpfromstot,
wherepDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,
0
Ds,and
k
Dt.  Without loss of generality,p
is a simple path, and sok<
j
V
j
.ForiD0; 1; : : : ; k1, edge.
i
;
iC1
/2E
f
.
Becausehis a height function,h.
i
/h.
iC1
/C1foriD0; 1; : : : ; k1.Com-
bining these inequalities over pathpyieldsh.s/h.t /Ck. But becauseh.t /D0,

26.4Push-relabel algorithms743
we haveh.s/k<
j
V
j
, which contradicts the requirement thath.s/D
j
V
j
in a
height function.
We are now ready to show that if the generic push-relabel algorithm terminates,
the preflow it computes is a maximum flow.
Theorem 26.18 (Correctness of the generic push-relabel algorithm)
If the algorithm  G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELterminates  when run on a flow net-
workGD.V; E/with sourcesand sinkt, then the preflowfit computes is a
maximum flow forG.
ProofWe use the following loop invariant:
Each  time  thewhileloop  test  in  line  2  in  G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELis
executed,fis a preflow.
Initialization:I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOWmakesfapreflow.
Maintenance:The only operations within thewhileloop of lines 2–3 are push and
relabel. Relabel operations affect only height attributes and not the flow values;
hence they do not affect whetherfis a preflow. As argued on page 739, iffis
a preflow prior to a push operation, it remains a preflow afterward.
Termination:At termination, each vertex inV
f
s; t
g
must have an excess of0,
because by Lemma 26.14 and the invariant thatfis always a preflow, there are
no overflowing vertices.  Therefore,fis a flow.  Lemma 26.16 shows thathis
a height function at termination, and thus Lemma 26.17 tells us that there is no
path fromstotin the residual networkG
f
. By the max-flow min-cut theorem
(Theorem 26.6), therefore,fisamaximumflow.
Analysis of the push-relabel method
To show that the generic push-relabel algorithm indeed terminates, we shall bound
the number of operations it performs. We bound separately each of the three types
of operations:  relabels, saturating pushes, and nonsaturating pushes.  With knowl-
edge of these bounds, it is a straightforward problem to construct an algorithm that
runs inO.V
2
E/time.  Before beginning the analysis, however, we prove an im-
portant lemma. Recall that we allow edges into the source in the residual network.
Lemma 26.19
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt,andletfbeapreflow
inG. Then, for any overflowing vertexx, there is a simple path fromxtosin the
residual networkG
f
.

744Chapter 26Maximum Flow
ProofFor an overflowing vertexx,letUDfWthere exists a simple path fromx
toinG
f
g, and suppose for the sake of contradiction thats62U.LetUDVU.
We take the definition  of excess  from  equation  (26.14),  sum over  all  vertices
inU, and note thatVDU[
U, to obtain
X
u2U
e.u/
D
X
u2U
 
X
2V
f.;u/
X
2V
f.u;/
!
D
X
u2U
  
X
2U
f.;u/C
X
2U
f.;u/
!

 
X
2U
f.u;/C
X
2U
f.u;/
!!
D
X
u2U
X
2U
f.;u/C
X
u2U
X
2U
f.;u/
X
u2U
X
2U
f.u;/
X
u2U
X
2U
f.u;/
D
X
u2U
X
2U
f.;u/
X
u2U
X
2U
f.u;/:
We know that the quantity
P
u2U
e.u/must be positive becausee.x/ > 0,x2U,
all vertices other thanshave nonnegative excess, and, by assumption,s62U. Thus,
we have
X
u2U
X
2U
f.;u/
X
u2U
X
2U
f.u;/ > 0:(26.17)
All edge flows are nonnegative, and so for equation (26.17) to hold, we must have
P
u2U
P
2U
f.;u/ > 0.   Hence,  there  must exist  at least  one pair  of  vertices
u
0
2Uand
0
2Uwithf.
0
;u
0
/>0.But,iff.
0
;u
0
/>0, there must be a
residual  edge.u
0
;
0
/, which means that there is a simple path fromxto
0
(the
pathxu
0
!
0
), thus contradicting the definition ofU.
The  next  lemma  bounds  the  heights  of  vertices,  and  its  corollary  bounds  the
number of relabel operations that are performed in total.
Lemma 26.20
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt.  At any time during
the execution of G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELonG,wehaveu:h2
j
V
j
1for all
verticesu2V.
ProofThe  heights  of  the  sourcesand  the  sinktnever  change  because  these
vertices are by definition not overflowing.  Thus, we always haves:hD
j
V
j
and
t:hD0, both of which are no greater than2
j
V
j
1.
Now consider any vertexu2V
f
s; t
g
. Initially,u:hD02
j
V
j
1.Weshall
show that after each relabeling operation, we still haveu:h2
j
V
j
1.Whenuis

26.4Push-relabel algorithms745
relabeled, it is overflowing, and Lemma 26.19 tells us that there is a simple pathp
fromutosinG
f
.LetpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
0
Du,
k
Ds,andk
j
V
j
1
becausepis  simple.   ForiD0; 1; : : : ; k1,wehave.
i
;
iC1
/2E
f
,and
therefore, by Lemma 26.16,
i
:h
iC1
:hC1. Expanding these inequalities over
pathpyieldsu:hD
0
:h
k
:hCks:hC.
j
V
j
1/D2
j
V
j
1.
Corollary 26.21 (Bound on relabel operations)
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sourcesand sinkt.  Then,  during the
execution of G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELonG, the number of relabel operations is
at most2
j
V
j
1per vertex and at most.2
j
V
j
1/.
j
V
j
2/ < 2
j
V
j
2
overall.
ProofOnly the
j
V
j
2vertices inV
f
s; t
g
may be relabeled. Letu2V
f
s; t
g
.
The operation R
ELABEL.u/increasesu:h.Thevalueofu:his initially0and by
Lemma 26.20,  it grows to at most2
j
V
j
1.  Thus, each vertexu2V
f
s; t
g
is relabeled  at most2
j
V
j
1times,  and the total  number  of  relabel  operations
performed is at most.2
j
V
j
1/.
j
V
j
2/ < 2
j
V
j
2
.
Lemma 26.20 also helps us to bound the number of saturating pushes.
Lemma 26.22 (Bound on saturating pushes)
During  the  execution  of  G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELon  any  flow networkGD
.V; E/, the number of saturating pushes is less than2
j
V
jj
E
j
.
ProofFor  any  pair  of  verticesu; 2V,  we will  count  the  saturating  pushes
fromutoand fromtoutogether, calling them the saturating pushes betweenu
and.  If there are any such pushes,  at least one of.u; /and.; u/is actually
an  edge  inE.   Now,  suppose  that  a  saturating  push  fromutohas  occurred.
At that  time,:hDu:h1.   In  order  for  another  push  fromutoto  occur
later, the algorithm must first push flow fromtou, which cannot happen until
:hDu:hC1.Sinceu:hnever  decreases,  in  order  for:hDu:hC1,the
value of:hmust increase by at least2. Likewise,u:hmust increase by at least2
between saturating pushes fromtou.  Heights start at0and, by Lemma 26.20,
never exceed2
j
V
j
1, which implies that the number of times any vertex can have
its height increase by2is less than
j
V
j
.  Since at least one ofu:hand:hmust
increase by2between any two saturating pushes betweenuand, there are fewer
than2
j
V
j
saturating pushes betweenuand. Multiplying by the number of edges
gives a bound of less than2
j
V
jj
E
j
on the total number of saturating pushes.
The following lemma bounds the number of nonsaturating pushes in the generic
push-relabel algorithm.

746Chapter 26Maximum Flow
Lemma 26.23 (Bound on nonsaturating pushes)
During  the  execution  of  G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELon  any  flow networkGD
.V; E/, the number of nonsaturating pushes is less than4
j
V
j
2
.
j
V
j
C
j
E
j
/.
ProofDefine a potential functionˆD
P
We./>0
:h.  Initially,ˆD0,andthe
value  ofˆmay change after each relabeling,  saturating push,  and nonsaturating
push.  We will bound the amount that saturating pushes and relabelings can con-
tribute to the increase ofˆ. Then we will show that each nonsaturating push must
decreaseˆby at least1, and will use these bounds to derive an upper bound on the
number of nonsaturating pushes.
Let  us examine  the  two ways in  whichˆmight  increase.   First,  relabeling  a
vertexuincreasesˆby less than2
j
V
j
, since the set over which the sum is taken is
the same and the relabeling cannot increaseu’s height by more than its maximum
possible height, which, by Lemma 26.20, is at most2
j
V
j
1. Second, a saturating
push from a vertexuto a vertexincreasesˆby less than2
j
V
j
, since no heights
change and only vertex, whose height is at most2
j
V
j
1, can possibly become
overflowing.
Now we show that a nonsaturating push fromutodecreasesˆby at least1.
Why?  Before the nonsaturating push,uwas overflowing, andmay or may not
have  been  overflowing.   By Lemma 26.13,uis no longer  overflowing  after  the
push.  In addition, unlessis the source, it may or may not be overflowing after
the push.  Therefore, the potential functionˆhas decreased by exactlyu:h,andit
has increased by either0or:h.Sinceu:h
:hD1, the net effect is that the
potential function has decreased by at least1.
Thus, during the course of the algorithm,  the total amount of increase inˆis
due to relabelings  and saturated  pushes,  and Corollary  26.21 and Lemma 26.22
constrain  the  increase  to  be  less  than.2
j
V
j
/.2
j
V
j
2
/C.2
j
V
j
/.2
j
V
jj
E
j
/D
4
j
V
j
2
.
j
V
j
C
j
E
j
/.Sinceˆ0, the total amount of decrease, and therefore the
total number of nonsaturating pushes, is less than4
j
V
j
2
.
j
V
j
C
j
E
j
/.
Having  bounded  the  number  of  relabelings,  saturating  pushes,  and  nonsatu-
rating  push,  we  have  set  the  stage  for  the  following  analysis  of  the  G
ENERIC-
P
USH-RELABELprocedure, and hence of any algorithm based on the push-relabel
method.
Theorem 26.24
During  the  execution  of  G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABELon  any  flow networkGD
.V; E/, the number of basic operations isO.V
2
E/.
ProofImmediate from Corollary 26.21 and Lemmas 26.22 and 26.23.

26.4Push-relabel algorithms747
Thus,  the algorithm  terminates  afterO.V
2
E/operations.   All that remains is
to give an efficient method for implementing each operation and for choosing an
appropriate operation to execute.
Corollary 26.25
There  is  an  implementation  of  the  generic  push-relabel  algorithm  that  runs  in
O.V
2
E/time on any flow networkGD.V; E/.
ProofExercise 26.4-2 asks you to show how to implement the generic algorithm
with an overhead ofO.V /per relabel operation andO.1/per push.  It also asks
you to design a data structure that allows you to pick an applicable operation in
O.1/time. The corollary then follows.
Exercises
26.4-1
Prove that, after the procedure  I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOW.G; s/terminates,  we have
s:e
j
f

j
,wheref

is a maximum flow forG.
26.4-2
Show how to implement the generic push-relabel algorithm usingO.V /time per
relabel operation,O.1/time per push, andO.1/time to select an applicable oper-
ation, for a total time ofO.V
2
E/.
26.4-3
Prove that the generic push-relabel algorithm spends a total of onlyO.VE/time
in performing all theO.V
2
/relabel operations.
26.4-4
Suppose that we have found a maximum flow in a flow networkGD.V; E/using
a push-relabel algorithm. Give a fast algorithm to find a minimum cut inG.
26.4-5
Give an efficient push-relabel algorithm to find a maximum matching in a bipartite
graph. Analyze your algorithm.
26.4-6
Suppose  that  all  edge  capacities  in  a  flow  networkGD.V; E/are  in  the  set
f
1;2;:::;k
g
.  Analyze the running time of the generic push-relabel  algorithm in
terms of
j
V
j
,
j
E
j
,andk.(Hint:How many times can each edge support a nonsat-
urating push before it becomes saturated?)

748Chapter 26Maximum Flow
26.4-7
Show that we could change line 6 of I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOWto
6s:hD
j
G:V
j
2
without affecting the correctness or asymptotic performance of the generic push-
relabel algorithm.
26.4-8
Letı
f
.u; /be the distance  (number  of  edges)  fromutoin the residual  net-
workG
f
.    Show  that  the  GENERIC-PUSH-RELABELprocedure  maintains  the
properties  thatu:h<
j
V
j
impliesu:hı
f
.u; t /and  thatu:h
j
V
j
implies
u:h
j
V
j
ı
f
.u; s/.
26.4-9?
As in the previous exercise, letı
f
.u; /be the distance fromutoin the residual
networkG
f
.  Show how to modify the generic push-relabel algorithm to maintain
the property thatu:h<
j
V
j
impliesu:hDı
f
.u; t /and thatu:h
j
V
j
implies
u:h
j
V
j
Dı
f
.u; s/. The total time that your implementation dedicates to main-
taining this property should beO.VE/.
26.4-10
Show that the number of nonsaturating pushes executed by the G
ENERIC-PUSH-
R
ELABELprocedure  on  a  flow  networkGD.V; E/is  at  most4
j
V
j
2
j
E
j
for
j
V
j
4.
?26.5  The relabel-to-front algorithm
The push-relabel  method allows us to apply the basic operations in any order at
all. By choosing the order carefully and managing the network data structure effi-
ciently, however, we can solve the maximum-flow problem faster than theO.V
2
E/
bound given by Corollary 26.25.  We shall now examine the relabel-to-front algo-
rithm, a push-relabel algorithm whose running time isO.V
3
/, which is asymptot-
ically at least as good asO.V
2
E/, and even better for dense networks.
The relabel-to-front  algorithm  maintains  a list  of  the  vertices  in the  network.
Beginning at the front, the algorithm scans the list, repeatedly selecting an over-
flowing vertexuand then “discharging”  it,  that  is,  performing  push and relabel
operations  untiluno longer  has  a positive  excess.   Whenever  we relabel  a ver-
tex, we move it to the front of the list (hence the name “relabel-to-front”) and the
algorithm begins its scan anew.

26.5The relabel-to-front algorithm749
The  correctness  and  analysis  of  the  relabel-to-front  algorithm  depend  on  the
notion of “admissible” edges:  those edges in the residual network through which
flow can be pushed. After proving some properties about the network of admissible
edges, we shall investigate the discharge operation and then present and analyze the
relabel-to-front algorithm itself.
Admissible edges and networks
IfGD.V; E/is a flow network with sourcesand sinkt,fis a preflow inG,andh
is a height function, then we say that.u; /is anadmissible edgeifc
f
.u; / > 0
andh.u/Dh./C1. Otherwise,.u; /isinadmissible.Theadmissible network
isG
f;h
D.V; E
f;h
/,whereE
f;h
is the set of admissible edges.
The admissible network consists of those edges through which we can push flow.
The following lemma shows that this network is a directed acyclic graph (dag).
Lemma 26.26 (The admissible network is acyclic)
IfGD.V; E/is a flow network,fis a preflow inG,andhis a height function
onG, then the admissible networkG
f;h
D.V; E
f;h
/is acyclic.
ProofThe proof  is by contradiction.   Suppose  thatG
f;h
contains  a cyclepD
h
0
;
1
;:::;
k
i,where
0
D
k
andk>0. Since each edge inpis admissible, we
haveh.
i1
/Dh.
i
/C1foriD1;2;:::;k. Summing around the cycle gives
k
X
iD1
h.
i1
/D
k
X
iD1
.h.
i
/C1/
D
k
X
iD1
h.
i
/Ck:
Because each vertex in cyclepappears once in each of the summations, we derive
the contradiction that0Dk.
The next two lemmas show how push and relabel operations change the admis-
sible network.
Lemma 26.27
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network, letfbeapreflowinG, and suppose that the
attributehis a height function.  If a vertexuis overflowing and.u; /is an ad-
missible edge,  then  P
USH.u; /applies.  The operation does not create any new
admissible edges, but it may cause.u; /to become inadmissible.

750Chapter 26Maximum Flow
ProofBy the definition of an admissible edge,  we can push flow fromuto.
Sinceuis overflowing, the operation P
USH.u; /applies.  The only new residual
edge that pushing  flow fromutocan create is.; u/.Since:hDu:h1,
edge.; u/cannot become admissible.  If the operation is a saturating push, then
c
f
.u; /D0afterward and.u; /becomes inadmissible.
Lemma 26.28
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network,  letfbeapreflowinG,  and suppose  that
the attributehis a height function.  If a vertexuis overflowing and there are no
admissible edges leavingu,thenR
ELABEL.u/applies. After the relabel operation,
there is at least one admissible edge leavingu, but there are no admissible edges
enteringu.
ProofIfuis overflowing, then by Lemma 26.14, either a push or a relabel op-
eration  applies  to  it.   If  there  are  no  admissible  edges  leavingu,thennoflow
can be pushed fromuand so R
ELABEL.u/applies.  After the relabel operation,
u:hD1Cmin
f
:hW.u; /2E
f
g
.  Thus, ifis a vertex that realizes the mini-
mum in this set, the edge.u; /becomes admissible. Hence, after the relabel, there
is at least one admissible edge leavingu.
To show that no admissible edges enteruafter a relabel operation, suppose that
there is a vertexsuch that.; u/is admissible.  Then,:hDu:hC1after the
relabel, and so:h>u:hC1just before the relabel.  But by Lemma 26.12, no
residual edges exist between vertices whose heights differ by more than1.More-
over, relabeling a vertex does not change the residual network.  Thus,.; u/is not
in the residual network, and hence it cannot be in the admissible network.
Neighbor lists
Edges in the relabel-to-front algorithm are organized into “neighbor lists.”  Given
a flow networkGD.V; E/,theneighbor listu:Nfor a vertexu2Vis a singly
linked list of the neighbors ofuinG.  Thus, vertexappears in the listu:Nif
.u; /2Eor.; u/2E. The neighbor listu:Ncontains exactly those vertices
for which there may be a residual edge.u; /.  The attributeu:N:headpoints to
the first vertex inu:N,and:next-neighborpoints to the vertex followingin a
neighbor list; this pointer is
NILifis the last vertex in the neighbor list.
The relabel-to-front algorithm cycles through each neighbor list in an arbitrary
order that is fixed throughout  the execution of the algorithm.  For each vertexu,
the attributeu:currentpoints to the vertex currently under consideration inu:N.
Initially,u:currentis set tou:N:head.

26.5The relabel-to-front algorithm751
Discharging an overflowing vertex
An overflowing vertexuisdischargedby pushing all of its excess flow through
admissible edges to neighboring vertices, relabelinguas necessary to cause edges
leavinguto become admissible. The pseudocode goes as follows.
D
ISCHARGE.u/
1whileu:e>0
2Du:current
3if
==NIL
4RELABEL.u/
5u:currentDu:N:head
6elseifc
f
.u; / > 0andu:h==:hC1
7P
USH.u; /
8elseu:currentD:next-neighbor
Figure 26.9 steps through several iterations of thewhileloop of lines 1–8, which
executes as long as vertexuhas positive excess.  Each iteration performs exactly
one of three actions, depending on the current vertexin the neighbor listu:N.
1.  Ifis
NIL,  then we have  run off  the end  ofu:N.   Line 4 relabels  vertexu,
and  then  line  5  resets  the  current  neighbor  ofuto  be  the  first  one  inu:N.
(Lemma 26.29 below states that the relabel operation applies in this situation.)
2.  Ifis  non-
NILand.u; /is  an  admissible  edge  (determined  by  the  test  in
line 6), then line 7 pushes some (or possibly all) ofu’s excess to vertex.
3.  Ifis non-
NILbut.u; /is inadmissible, then line 8 advancesu:currentone
position further in the neighbor listu:N.
Observe that if D
ISCHARGEis called on an overflowing vertexu, then the last
action performed by D
ISCHARGEmust be a push fromu.  Why?  The procedure
terminates only whenu:ebecomes zero, and neither the relabel operation nor ad-
vancing the pointeru:currentaffects the value ofu:e.
We must be sure that when P
USHor RELABELis called by DISCHARGE,the
operation applies. The next lemma proves this fact.
Lemma 26.29
If D
ISCHARGEcalls PUSH.u; /in line 7, then a push operation applies to.u; /.
If D
ISCHARGEcalls RELABEL.u/in line 4, then a relabel operation applies tou.
ProofThe tests in lines 1 and 6 ensure that a push operation occurs only if the
operation applies, which proves the first statement in the lemma.

752Chapter 26Maximum Flow
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
19
z
0
5/5
8
14/14
s
x
z
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
19
z
0
8
14/14
s
x
z
5/5
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
11
z
8
8/8
14/14
5/5
s
x
z
s
x
z
123
s
x
z
4
5
s
x
z
6
s
x
z
7
s
x
z
8
s
x
z
9
(a)
(b)
(c)
Figure 26.9Discharging a vertexy. It takes15iterations of thewhileloop of DISCHARGEto push
all the excess flow fromy. Only the neighbors ofyand edges of the flow network that enter or leavey
are shown.  In each part of the figure, the number inside each vertex is its excess at the beginning of
the first iteration shown in the part, and each vertex is shown at its height throughout the part.  The
neighbor listy:Nat the beginning of each iteration appears on the right, with the iteration number
on top.  The shaded neighbor isy:current.(a)Initially, there are19units of excess to push fromy,
andy:currentDs. Iterations 1, 2, and 3 just advancey:current, since there are no admissible edges
leavingy. Initeration4,y:currentD
NIL(shown by the shading being below the neighbor list),
and soyis relabeled andy:currentis reset to the head of the neighbor list.(b)After relabeling,
vertexyhas height1. In iterations 5 and 6, edges.y; s/and.y; x/are found to be inadmissible, but
iteration 7 pushes8units of excess flow fromyto ́. Because of the push,y:currentdoes not advance
in this iteration.(c)Because the push in iteration 7 saturated edge.y;  ́/, it is found inadmissible in
iteration 8. In iteration 9,y:currentD
NIL,andsovertexyis again relabeled andy:currentis reset.

26.5The relabel-to-front algorithm753
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
5
y
6
z
8
5
8/8
14/14
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
11
z
8
8/8
14/14
5/5
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
5
y
6
z
8
8/8
14/14
5
s
–20
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
5
y
0
z
8
5
8/8
8/14
s
x
z
10
s
x
z
11
s
x
z
12
s
x
z
13
s
x
z
14
s
x
z
15
(f)
(d)
(e)
(g)
Figure 26.9, continued  (d)In iteration 10,.y; s/is inadmissible, but iteration 11 pushes5units
of  excess  flow  fromytox.(e)Becausey:currentdid  not  advance  in iteration 11,  iteration  12
finds.y; x/to be inadmissible.  Iteration 13 finds.y;  ́/inadmissible, and iteration 14 relabels ver-
texyand resetsy:current.(f)Iteration 15 pushes6units of excess flow fromytos.(g)Ve r t e xy
now has no excess flow, and D
ISCHARGEterminates.  In this example, DISCHARGEboth starts and
finishes with the current pointer at the head of the neighbor list, but in general this need not be the
case.

754Chapter 26Maximum Flow
To prove the second statement, according to the test in line 1 and Lemma 26.28,
we  need  only  show  that  all  edges  leavinguare  inadmissible.If  a  call  to
D
ISCHARGE.u/starts with the pointeru:currentat the head ofu’s neighbor list
and finishes with it off the end of the list, then all ofu’s outgoing edges are in-
admissible and a relabel operation applies.  It is possible,  however, that during a
call  to  D
ISCHARGE.u/,  the  pointeru:currenttraverses  only  part  of  the  list  be-
fore the procedure returns.  Calls to D
ISCHARGEon other vertices may then oc-
cur,  butu:currentwill  continue  moving  through  the  list  during  the  next  call  to
D
ISCHARGE.u/.  We now consider what happens during a complete pass through
the list, which begins at the head ofu:Nand finishes withu:currentD
NIL.Once
u:currentreaches the end of the list,  the procedure relabelsuand begins a new
pass. For theu:currentpointer to advance past a vertex2u:Nduring a pass, the
edge.u; /must be deemed inadmissible by the test in line 6.  Thus, by the time
the pass completes, every edge leavinguhas been determined to be inadmissible
at some time during the pass.  The key observation is that at the end of the pass,
every edge leavinguis still inadmissible.  Why? By Lemma 26.27, pushes cannot
create any admissible edges, regardless of which vertex the flow is pushed from.
Thus, any admissible edge must be created by a relabel operation. But the vertexu
is not relabeled during the pass, and by Lemma 26.28, any other vertexthat is
relabeled during the pass (resulting from a call of D
ISCHARGE./) has no entering
admissible edges after relabeling.  Thus, at the end of the pass, all edges leavingu
remain inadmissible, which completes the proof.
The relabel-to-front algorithm
In the relabel-to-front algorithm, we maintain a linked listLconsisting of all ver-
tices inV
f
s; t
g
. A key property is that the vertices inLare topologically sorted
according to the admissible network, as we shall see in the loop invariant that fol-
lows. (Recall from Lemma 26.26 that the admissible network is a dag.)
The  pseudocode  for  the  relabel-to-front  algorithm  assumes  that  the  neighbor
listsu:Nhave already been created for each vertexu.  It also assumes thatu:next
points to the vertex that followsuin listLand that, as usual,u:nextD
NILifuis
the last vertex in the list.

26.5The relabel-to-front algorithm755
RELABEL-TO-FRONT.G;s;t/
1I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOW.G; s/
2LDG:V
f
s; t
g
, in any order
3foreach vertexu2G:V
f
s; t
g
4u:currentDu:N:head
5uDL:head
6whileu¤
NIL
7old-heightDu:h
8D
ISCHARGE.u/
9ifu:h>old-height
10moveuto the front of listL
11uDu:next
The relabel-to-front algorithm works as follows.  Line 1 initializes the preflow
and heights to the same values as in the generic push-relabel  algorithm.   Line 2
initializes  the listLto contain all potentially  overflowing vertices,  in any order.
Lines 3–4 initialize thecurrentpointer of each vertexuto the first vertex inu’s
neighbor list.
As Figure 26.10 illustrates, thewhileloop of lines 6–11 runs through the listL,
discharging  vertices.  Line 5 makes it start with the first vertex in the list.  Each
time  through  the  loop,  line  8  discharges  a  vertexu.Ifuwas  relabeled  by  the
D
ISCHARGEprocedure, line 10 moves it to the front of listL.  We can determine
whetheruwas relabeled by comparing its height before the discharge operation,
saved  into the variableold-heightin line 7,  with its height  afterward,  in line 9.
Line 11 makes the next iteration of thewhileloop use the vertex followinguin
listL. If line 10 moveduto the front of the list, the vertex used in the next iteration
is the one followinguin its new position in the list.
To show that R
ELABEL-TO-FRONTcomputes a maximum flow, we shall show
that  it  is  an  implementation  of  the  generic  push-relabel  algorithm.    First,  ob-
serve  that  it  performs  push  and  relabel  operations  only  when  they  apply,  since
Lemma 26.29 guarantees that D
ISCHARGEperforms them only when they apply.
It remains to show that when R
ELABEL-TO-FRONTterminates,  no basic opera-
tions  apply.   The remainder  of  the correctness  argument  relies  on  the following
loop invariant:
At each test in line 6 of R
ELABEL-TO-FRONT,  listLis a topological sort
of the vertices in the admissible networkG
f;h
D.V; E
f;h
/, and no vertex
beforeuin the list has excess flow.
Initialization:Immediately after I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOWhas been run,s:hD
j
V
j
and:hD0for  all2V
f
s
g
.Since
j
V
j
2(becauseVcontains  at

756Chapter 26Maximum Flow
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
12
y
14
z
0
t
0
5810
7
16
14/14
12/12
L:
xyz
N:
s
y
z
t
s
x
z
x
y
t
(a)
s
–26
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
19
z
0
t
7
5/5
810
14/14
12/12
L:xyz
N:s
y
z
t
s
x
z
x
y
t
(b)
7
7/16
s
–20
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
5
y
0
z
8
t
7
5
8/8
10
8/14
12/12
L:xyz
N:s
y
z
t
s
x
z
x
y
t
(c)
7
7/16
Figure 26.10The action of RELABEL-TO-FRONT.(a)A flow network just before the first iteration
of thewhileloop.  Initially,26units of flow leave sources.  On the right is shown the initial list
LDhx; y;  ́i, where initiallyuDx. Under each vertex in listLis its neighbor list, with the current
neighbor shaded. Vertexxis discharged. It is relabeled to height1,5units of excess flow are pushed
toy,andthe7remaining units of excess are pushed to the sinkt.  Becausexis relabeled, it moves
to the head ofL, which in this case does not change the structure ofL.(b)Afterx, the next vertex
inLthat is discharged isy. Figure 26.9 shows the detailed action of dischargingyin this situation.
Becauseyis relabeled, it is moved to the head ofL.(c)Ve r t e xxnow followsyinL, and so it is
again discharged, pushing all5units of excess flow tot.  Because vertexxis not relabeled in this
discharge operation, it remains in place in listL.

26.5The relabel-to-front algorithm757
s
–20
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
0
z
8
t
12
5
8/8
10
8/14
12/12
L:xyz
N:s
y
z
t
s
x
z
x
y
t
(d)
7
12/16
s
–20
5
4
3
2
1
0
6
x
0
y
0
z
0
t
20
5
8/8
8/10
8/14
12/12
L:xyz
N:s
y
z
t
s
x
z
x
y
t
(e)
12/16
7
Figure 26.10, continued  (d)Since vertex ́follows vertexxinL, it is discharged.  It is relabeled
to height1and all8units of excess flow are pushed tot.  Because ́is relabeled, it moves to the
front ofL.(e)Ve r t e xynow follows vertex ́inLand is therefore discharged. But becauseyhas no
excess, D
ISCHARGEimmediately returns, andyremains in place inL.Vertexxis then discharged.
Because it, too, has no excess, D
ISCHARGEagain returns, andxremains in place inL.RELABEL-
T
O-FRONThas reached the end of listLand terminates. There are nooverflowing vertices, and the
preflow is a maximum flow.
leastsandt), no edge can be admissible.  Thus,E
f;h
D;, and any ordering of
V
f
s; t
g
is a topological sort ofG
f;h
.
Becauseuis initially the head of the listL, there are no vertices before it and
so there are none before it with excess flow.
Maintenance:To see that each iteration of thewhileloop maintains the topolog-
ical sort, we start by observing that the admissible network is changed only by
push and relabel operations.  By Lemma 26.27, push operations do not cause
edges to become admissible.  Thus, only relabel operations can create admissi-
ble edges. After a vertexuis relabeled, however, Lemma 26.28 states that there
are no admissible edges enteringubut there may be admissible edges leavingu.
Thus, by movinguto the front ofL, the algorithm ensures that any admissible
edges leavingusatisfy the topological sort ordering.

758Chapter 26Maximum Flow
To see that no vertex precedinguinLhas excess flow, we denote the vertex
that will beuin the next iteration byu
0
. The vertices that will precedeu
0
in the
next iteration include the currentu(due to line 11) and either no other vertices
(ifuis relabeled) or the same vertices as before (ifuis not relabeled). Whenu
is discharged,  it has no excess flow afterward.  Thus, ifuis relabeled during
the discharge, no vertices precedingu
0
have excess flow.  Ifuis not relabeled
during the discharge, no vertices before it on the list acquired excess flow during
this discharge, becauseLremained topologically sorted at all times during the
discharge (as just pointed out, admissible edges are created only by relabeling,
not pushing), and so each push operation causes excess flow to move only to
vertices further down the list (or tosort). Again, no vertices precedingu
0
have
excess flow.
Termination:When the loop terminates,uis just past the end ofL,andsothe
loop invariant ensures that the excess of every vertex is0. Thus, no basic oper-
ations apply.
Analysis
We shall now show that  R
ELABEL-TO-FRONTruns inO.V
3
/time on any flow
networkGD.V; E/.   Since the algorithm  is an implementation  of the generic
push-relabel  algorithm,  we shall  take  advantage  of  Corollary  26.21,  which  pro-
vides anO.V /bound on the number of relabel operations executed per vertex and
anO.V
2
/bound on the total number of relabel operations overall. In addition, Ex-
ercise 26.4-3 provides anO.VE/bound on the total time spent performing relabel
operations,  and Lemma 26.22 provides anO.VE/bound on the total number of
saturating push operations.
Theorem 26.30
The  running  time  of  R
ELABEL-TO-FRONTon  any  flow  networkGD.V; E/
isO.V
3
/.
ProofLet us consider a “phase” of the relabel-to-front algorithm to be the time
between two consecutive relabel operations.  There areO.V
2
/phases, since there
areO.V
2
/relabel  operations.   Each phase consists  of at most
j
V
j
calls to DIS-
CHARGE,  which we can see as follows.   If  DISCHARGEdoes  not  perform  a re-
label operation, then the next call to D
ISCHARGEis further down the listL,and
the length ofLis less than
j
V
j
.IfD
ISCHARGEdoes perform a relabel, the next
call  to  D
ISCHARGEbelongs  to a  different  phase.   Since  each  phase  contains  at
most
j
V
j
calls to D
ISCHARGEand there areO.V
2
/phases, the number of times
D
ISCHARGEis called in line 8 of RELABEL-TO-FRONTisO.V
3
/. Thus, the total

26.5The relabel-to-front algorithm759
work performed by thewhileloop in RELABEL-TO-FRONT,  excluding the work
performed within D
ISCHARGE,isatmostO.V
3
/.
We must  now  bound  the  work  performed  within  D
ISCHARGEduring  the  ex-
ecution  of  the  algorithm.   Each  iteration  of  thewhileloop  within  D
ISCHARGE
performs one of three actions. We shall analyze the total amount of work involved
in performing each of these actions.
We start with relabel operations (lines 4–5). Exercise 26.4-3 provides anO.VE/
time bound on all theO.V
2
/relabels that are performed.
Now, suppose that the action updates theu:currentpointer in line 8. This action
occursO.degree.u//times each time a vertexuis relabeled, andO.Vdegree.u//
times overall for the vertex.  For all vertices, therefore,  the total amount of work
done in advancing pointers in neighbor lists isO.VE/by the handshaking lemma
(Exercise B.4-1).
The third type of action performed by D
ISCHARGEis a push operation (line 7).
We already know that the total number of saturating push operations isO.VE/.
Observe that if a nonsaturating push is executed, D
ISCHARGEimmediately returns,
since the push reduces the excess to0. Thus, there can be at most one nonsaturating
push per call to D
ISCHARGE. Aswehaveobserved,DISCHARGEis calledO.V
3
/
times, and thus the total time spent performing nonsaturating pushes isO.V
3
/.
The running  time of  R
ELABEL-TO-FRONTis thereforeO.V
3
CVE/,which
isO.V
3
/.
Exercises
26.5-1
Illustrate the execution of R
ELABEL-TO-FRONTin the manner of Figure 26.10 for
the flow network in Figure 26.1(a). Assume that the initial ordering of vertices inL
ish
1
;
2
;
3
;
4
iand that the neighbor lists are

1
:NDhs; 
2
;
3
i;

2
:NDhs; 
1
;
3
;
4
i;

3
:NDh
1
;
2
;
4
;ti;

4
:NDh
2
;
3
;ti:
26.5-2?
We would like to implement a push-relabel algorithm in which we maintain a first-
in, first-out queue of overflowing vertices. The algorithm repeatedly discharges the
vertex at the head of the queue, and any vertices that were not overflowing before
the  discharge  but  are  overflowing  afterward  are  placed  at  the  end  of  the  queue.
After the vertex at the head of the queue is discharged,  it is removed.  When the

760Chapter 26Maximum Flow
queue is empty, the algorithm terminates.  Show how to implement this algorithm
to compute a maximum flow inO.V
3
/time.
26.5-3
Show  that  the  generic  algorithm  still  works  if  R
ELABELupdatesu:hby  sim-
ply  computingu:hDu:hC1.   How would  this  change  affect  the  analysis  of
R
ELABEL-TO-FRONT?
26.5-4?
Show that if we always discharge a highest overflowing vertex, we can make the
push-relabel method run inO.V
3
/time.
26.5-5
Suppose that at some point in the execution of a push-relabel algorithm, there exists
an integer0<k
j
V
j
1for which no vertex  has:hDk.   Show that  all
vertices with:h>kare on the source side of a minimum cut. If such akexists,
thegap heuristicupdates  every vertex2V
f
s
g
for  which:h>k,  to set
:hDmax.:h;
j
V
j
C1/. Show that the resulting attributehis a height function.
(The gap heuristic is crucial in making implementations of the push-relabel method
perform well in practice.)
Problems
26-1  Escape problem
Ann	ngridis an undirected graph consisting ofnrows andncolumns of vertices,
as shown in Figure 26.11. We denote the vertex in theith row and thejth column
by.i; j /. All vertices in a grid have exactly four neighbors, except for the boundary
vertices, which are the points.i; j /for whichiD1,iDn,jD1,orjDn.
Givenmn
2
starting  points.x
1
;y
1
/; .x
2
;y
2
/;:::;.x
m
;y
m
/in the  grid,  the
escape problemis to determine whether or not there aremvertex-disjoint  paths
from the starting points to anymdifferent points on the boundary.  For example,
the grid in Figure 26.11(a) has an escape, but the grid in Figure 26.11(b) does not.
a.Consider a flow network in which vertices, as well as edges, have capacities.
That is, the total positive flow entering any given vertex is subject to a capacity
constraint.  Show that determining the maximum flow in a network with edge
and vertex capacities can be reduced to an ordinary maximum-flow problem on
a flow network of comparable size.

Problems for Chapter 26761
(a)(b)
Figure 26.11Grids for the escape problem.  Starting points are black, and other grid vertices are
white.(a)A grid with an escape, shown by shaded paths.(b)A grid with no escape.
b.Describe  an efficient  algorithm  to solve  the  escape  problem,  and analyze  its
running time.
26-2  Minimum path cover
Apath coverof a directed graphGD.V; E/is a setPof vertex-disjoint  paths
such that every vertex inVis included in exactly one path inP.  Paths may start
and end anywhere, and they may be of any length, including0.Aminimum path
coverofGis a path cover containing the fewest possible paths.
a.Give an efficient algorithm to find a minimum path cover of a directed acyclic
graphGD.V; E/.(Hint:Assuming  thatVD
f
1;2;:::;n
g
,  construct  the
graphG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/,where
V
0
D
f
x
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n
g
[
f
y
0
;y
1
;:::;y
n
g
;
E
0
D
f
.x
0
;x
i
/Wi2V
g
[
f
.y
i
;y
0
/Wi2V
g
[
f
.x
i
;y
j
/W.i; j /2E
g
;
and run a maximum-flow algorithm.)
b.Does your algorithm work for directed graphs that contain cycles? Explain.
26-3  Algorithmic consulting
Professor Gore wants to open up an algorithmic consulting company. He has iden-
tifiednimportant subareas of algorithms (roughly corresponding to different por-
tions of this textbook), which he represents by the setAD
f
A
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
g
.In
each subareaA
k
, he can hire an expert in that area forc
k
dollars.  The consulting
company has lined up a setJD
f
J
1
;J
2
;:::;J
m
g
of potential  jobs.  In order to
perform jobJ
i
, the company needs to have hired experts in a subsetR
i
Aof

762Chapter 26Maximum Flow
subareas.  Each expert can work on multiple jobs simultaneously.  If the company
chooses to accept jobJ
i
, it must have hired experts in all subareas inR
i
, and it will
take in revenue ofp
i
dollars.
Professor Gore’s job is to determine which subareas to hire experts in and which
jobs to accept in order to maximize the net revenue, which is the total income from
jobs accepted minus the total cost of employing the experts.
Consider the following flow networkG.  It contains a source vertexs, vertices
A
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
, verticesJ
1
;J
2
;:::;J
m
, and a sink vertext.ForkD1;2:::;n,
the  flow  network  contains  an  edge.s; A
k
/with  capacityc.s; A
k
/Dc
k
,and
foriD1;2;:::;m,  the  flow  network  contains  an  edge.J
i
;t/with  capacity
c.J
i
;t/Dp
i
.ForkD1;2;:::;nandiD1;2;:::;m,ifA
k
2R
i
,thenG
contains an edge.A
k
;J
i
/with capacityc.A
k
;J
i
/D1.
a.Show that ifJ
i
2Tfor a finite-capacity cut.S; T /ofG,thenA
k
2Tfor each
A
k
2R
i
.
b.Show how to determine the maximum net revenue from the capacity of a mini-
mum cut ofGand the givenp
i
values.
c.Give an efficient algorithm to determine which jobs to accept and which experts
to  hire.   Analyze  the  running  time  of  your  algorithm  in  terms  ofm,n,and
rD
P
m
iD1
j
R
i
j
.
26-4  Updating maximum flow
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sources,sinkt, and integer capacities.
Suppose that we are given a maximum flow inG.
a.Suppose that we increase the capacity of a single edge.u; /2Eby1.Give
anO.VCE/-time algorithm to update the maximum flow.
b.Suppose that we decrease the capacity of a single edge.u; /2Eby1.Give
anO.VCE/-time algorithm to update the maximum flow.
26-5  Maximum flow by scaling
LetGD.V; E/be a flow network with sources,sinkt, and an integer capac-
ityc.u; /on each edge.u; /2E.LetCDmax
.u;/2E
c.u; /.
a.Argue that a minimum cut ofGhas capacity at mostC
j
E
j
.
b.For a given numberK,  show how to find an augmenting  path of capacity at
leastKinO.E/time, if such a path exists.

Problems for Chapter 26763
We can use the following modification of FORD-FULKERSON-METHODto com-
pute a maximum flow inG:
M
AX-FLOW-BY-SCALING.G;s;t/
1CDmax
.u;/2E
c.u; /
2    initialize flowfto0
3KD2
blgCc
4whileK1
5whilethere exists an augmenting pathpof capacity at leastK
6augment flowfalongp
7KDK=2
8returnf
c.Argue that M
AX-FLOW-BY-SCALINGreturns a maximum flow.
d.Show that the capacity of a minimum cut of the residual networkG
f
is at most
2K
j
E
j
each time line 4 is executed.
e.Argue that the innerwhileloop of lines 5–6 executesO.E/times for each value
ofK.
f.Conclude that M
AX-FLOW-BY-SCALINGcan be implemented so that it runs
inO.E
2
lgC/time.
26-6  The Hopcroft-Karp bipartite matching algorithm
In  this  problem,  we  describe  a  faster  algorithm,  due  to  Hopcroft  and  Karp,  for
finding a maximum matching in a bipartite graph. The algorithm runs inO.
p
VE/
time.  Given an undirected, bipartite graphGD.V; E/,whereVDL[Rand
all edges have exactly one endpoint inL,letMbe a matching inG.  We say that
asimplepathPinGis anaugmenting pathwith respect toMif it starts at an
unmatched vertex inL, ends at an unmatched vertex inR, and its edges belong
alternately toMandEM.  (This definition of an augmenting path is related
to,  but different  from,  an augmenting  path in a flow network.)   In this problem,
we treat a path as a sequence of edges,  rather than as a sequence of vertices.  A
shortest  augmenting  path  with  respect  to  a  matchingMis  an  augmenting  path
with a minimum number of edges.
Given two setsAandB,thesymmetric differenceA ̊Bis defined as.AB/[
.BA/, that is, the elements that are in exactly one of the two sets.

764Chapter 26Maximum Flow
a.Show that ifMis a matching andPis an augmenting path with respect toM,
then the symmetric differenceM ̊Pis a matching and
j
M ̊P
j
D
j
M
j
C1.
Show that ifP
1
;P
2
;:::;P
k
are vertex-disjoint augmenting paths with respect
toM, then the symmetric differenceM ̊.P
1
[P
2
[[P
k
/is a matching
with cardinality
j
M
j
Ck.
The general structure of our algorithm is the following:
H
OPCROFT-KARP.G/
1MD;
2repeat
3letPD
f
P
1
;P
2
;:::;P
k
g
be a maximal set of vertex-disjoint
shortest augmenting paths with respect toM
4MDM ̊.P
1
[P
2
[[P
k
/
5untilP
==;
6returnM
The remainder of this problem asks you to analyze the number of iterations in
the algorithm (that is, the number of iterations in therepeatloop) and to describe
an implementation of line 3.
b.Given two matchingsMandM

inG,  show that  every vertex in the graph
G
0
D.V; M ̊M

/has  degree  at  most  2.   Conclude  thatG
0
is  a  disjoint
union  of simple paths  or cycles.   Argue that  edges in each such simple  path
or  cycle  belong  alternately  toMorM

.   Prove  that  if
j
M
j

j
M

j
,then
M ̊M

contains at least
j
M

j

j
M
j
vertex-disjoint augmenting paths with
respect toM.
Letlbe the length of a shortest augmenting path with respect to a matchingM,and
letP
1
;P
2
;:::;P
k
be a maximal set of vertex-disjoint augmenting paths of lengthl
with respect toM.LetM
0
DM ̊.P
1
[[P
k
/, and suppose thatPisashortest
augmenting path with respect toM
0
.
c.Show that ifPis vertex-disjoint fromP
1
;P
2
;:::;P
k
,thenPhas more thanl
edges.
d.Now suppose thatPis not vertex-disjoint fromP
1
;P
2
;:::;P
k
.LetAbe the
set of edges.M ̊M
0
/ ̊P.  Show thatAD.P
1
[P
2
[[P
k
/ ̊Pand
that
j
A
j
.kC1/l. Conclude thatPhas more thanledges.
e.Prove that if a shortest augmenting path with respect toMhasledges, the size
of the maximum matching is at most
j
M
j
C
j
V
j
=.lC1/.

Notes for Chapter 26765
f.Show  that  the  number  ofrepeatloop  iterations   in  the  algorithm   is  at
most2
p
j
V
j
.(Hint:By how much canMgrow after iteration number
p
j
V
j
?)
g.Give  an  algorithm  that  runs  inO.E/time  to  find  a  maximal  set  of  vertex-
disjoint  shortest  augmenting  pathsP
1
;P
2
;:::;P
k
for  a  given  matchingM.
Conclude that the total running time of H
OPCROFT-KARPisO.
p
VE/.
Chapter notes
Ahuja, Magnanti, and Orlin [7], Even [103], Lawler [224], Papadimitriou and Stei-
glitz [271], and Tarjan [330] are good references for network flow and related algo-
rithms. Goldberg, Tardos, and Tarjan [139] also provide a nice survey of algorithms
for network-flow problems, and Schrijver [304] has written an interesting review
of historical developments in the field of network flows.
The Ford-Fulkerson method is due to Ford and Fulkerson [109], who originated
the formal study of many of the problems in the area of network flow, including
the maximum-flow and bipartite-matching problems. Many early implementations
of the Ford-Fulkerson method found augmenting paths using breadth-first search;
Edmonds and Karp [102], and independently Dinic [89], proved that this strategy
yields a polynomial-time algorithm. A related idea, that of using “blocking flows,”
was also first developed by Dinic [89]. Karzanov [202] first developed the idea of
preflows. The push-relabel method is due to Goldberg [136] and Goldberg and Tar-
jan [140]. Goldberg and Tarjan gave anO.V
3
/-time algorithm that uses a queue to
maintain the set of overflowing vertices, as well as an algorithm that uses dynamic
trees to achieve a running time ofO.VElg.V
2
=EC2//. Several other researchers
have developed push-relabel maximum-flow algorithms.  Ahuja and Orlin [9] and
Ahuja,  Orlin,  and  Tarjan  [10]  gave  algorithms  that  used  scaling.   Cheriyan  and
Maheshwari [62] proposed pushing flow from the overflowing vertex of maximum
height.  Cheriyan and Hagerup [61] suggested randomly permuting the neighbor
lists, and several researchers [14, 204, 276] developed clever derandomizations of
this idea, leading to a sequence of faster algorithms.  The algorithm of King, Rao,
and Tarjan [204] is the fastest  such algorithm  and runs inO.VElog
E=.VlgV/
V/
time.
The asymptotically fastest algorithm to date for the maximum-flow problem, by
Goldberg and Rao [138], runs in timeO.min.V
2=3
;E
1=2
/Elg.V
2
=EC2/lgC/,
whereCDmax
.u;/2E
c.u; /.   This  algorithm  does  not  use  the  push-relabel
method but instead is based on finding blocking  flows.  All previous  maximum-
flow algorithms,  including  the ones in this chapter,  use some notion  of distance
(the push-relabel algorithms use the analogous notion of height), with a length of1

766Chapter 26Maximum Flow
assigned implicitly to each edge. This new algorithm takes a different approach and
assigns a length of0to high-capacity edges and a length of1to low-capacity edges.
Informally, with respect to these lengths, shortest paths from the source to the sink
tend have high capacity, which means that fewer iterations need be performed.
In  practice,  push-relabel  algorithms  currently  dominate  augmenting-path  or
linear-programming  based  algorithms  for  the  maximum-flow  problem.   A study
by Cherkassky and Goldberg [63] underscores the importance of using two heuris-
tics  when implementing  a push-relabel  algorithm.   The first heuristic  is to peri-
odically perform a breadth-first search of the residual network in order to obtain
more accurate height values. The second heuristic is the gap heuristic, described in
Exercise 26.5-5.  Cherkassky and Goldberg conclude that the best choice of push-
relabel variants is the one that chooses to discharge the overflowing vertex with the
maximum height.
The  best  algorithm  to  date  for  maximum  bipartite  matching,  discovered  by
Hopcroft and Karp [176], runs inO.
p
VE/time and is described in Problem 26-6.
The  book  by  Lov ́asz  and  Plummer  [239]  is  an  excellent  reference  on  matching
problems.



VII  Selected Topics

Introduction
This part contains  a selection  of algorithmic  topics that extend and complement
earlier material in this book. Some chapters introduce new models of computation
such as circuits or parallel computers.  Others cover specialized domains such as
computational geometry or number theory.  The last two chapters discuss some of
the known limitations to the design of efficient algorithms and introduce techniques
for coping with those limitations.
Chapter 27 presents an algorithmic model for parallel computing based on dy-
namic multithreading.   The chapter  introduces  the basics of the model,  showing
how to quantify parallelism  in terms of the measures of work and span.  It then
investigates several interesting multithreaded algorithms, including algorithms for
matrix multiplication and merge sorting.
Chapter  28 studies  efficient  algorithms  for  operating  on matrices.   It  presents
two general  methods—LU decomposition  and LUP decomposition—for  solving
linear equations by Gaussian elimination inO.n
3
/time.  It also shows that matrix
inversion  and matrix  multiplication  can be performed  equally  fast.   The chapter
concludes by showing how to compute a least-squares approximate solution when
a set of linear equations has no exact solution.
Chapter 29 studies linear programming, in which we wish to maximize or mini-
mize an objective, given limited resources and competing constraints.  Linear pro-
gramming arises in a variety of practical application areas. This chapter covers how
to formulate and solve linear programs.  The solution method covered is the sim-
plex algorithm, which is the oldest algorithm for linear programming.  In contrast
to many algorithms in this book, the simplex algorithm does not run in polynomial
time in the worst case, but it is fairly efficient and widely used in practice.

770Part VII    Selected Topics
Chapter  30  studies  operations  on  polynomials  and  shows  how  to  use  a  well-
known signal-processing  technique—the fast Fourier transform (FFT)—to multi-
ply two degree-npolynomials inO.nlgn/time.  It also investigates efficient im-
plementations of the FFT, including a parallel circuit.
Chapter 31 presents number-theoretic  algorithms.  After reviewing elementary
number theory, it presents Euclid’s algorithm for computing greatest common di-
visors.   Next,  it  studies  algorithms  for solving  modular  linear  equations  and for
raising one number to a power modulo another number. Then, it explores an impor-
tant application of number-theoretic algorithms: the RSA public-key cryptosystem.
This cryptosystem can be used not only to encrypt messages so that an adversary
cannot read them, but also to provide digital signatures.  The chapter then presents
the Miller-Rabin randomized primality test, with which we can find large primes
efficiently—an essential requirement for the RSA system. Finally, the chapter cov-
ers Pollard’s “rho” heuristic for factoring integers and discusses the state of the art
of integer factorization.
Chapter  32  studies  the  problem  of  finding  all  occurrences  of  a  given  pattern
string in a given text string,  a problem that arises frequently  in text-editing  pro-
grams.  After examining the naive approach,  the chapter  presents  an elegant ap-
proach  due to Rabin and  Karp.   Then,  after  showing  an efficient  solution  based
on finite automata, the chapter presents the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, which
modifies the automaton-based  algorithm to save space by cleverly preprocessing
the pattern.
Chapter  33  considers  a  few  problems  in  computational  geometry.   After  dis-
cussing basic primitives of computational geometry, the chapter shows how to use
a “sweeping” method to efficiently determine whether a set of line segments con-
tains any intersections. Two clever algorithms for finding the convex hull of a set of
points—Graham’s scan and Jarvis’s march—also illustrate the power of sweeping
methods. The chapter closes with an efficient algorithm for finding the closest pair
from among a given set of points in the plane.
Chapter 34 concerns  NP-complete problems.  Many interesting  computational
problems are NP-complete, but no polynomial-time algorithm is known for solving
any of them.  This chapter presents techniques for determining when a problem is
NP-complete. Several classic problems are proved to be NP-complete: determining
whether a graph has a hamiltonian cycle, determining whether a boolean formula
is satisfiable,  and determining  whether  a given set  of numbers has a subset  that
adds up to a given target value. The chapter also proves that the famous traveling-
salesman problem is NP-complete.
Chapter 35 shows how to find approximate solutions to NP-complete problems
efficiently by using approximation algorithms.  For some NP-complete problems,
approximate solutions that are near optimal are quite easy to produce, but for others
even the best approximation algorithms known work progressively more poorly as

Part VII    Selected Topics771
the problem size increases. Then, there are some problems for which we can invest
increasing amounts of computation time in return for increasingly better approx-
imate solutions.   This chapter illustrates  these possibilities  with the vertex-cover
problem (unweighted and weighted versions),  an optimization version of 3-CNF
satisfiability,  the  traveling-salesman  problem,  the  set-covering  problem,  and  the
subset-sum problem.

27Multithreaded Algorithms
The  vast  majority  of  algorithms  in  this  book  areserial algorithmssuitable  for
running on a uniprocessor  computer  in which only one instruction  executes at a
time. In this chapter, we shall extend our algorithmic model to encompassparallel
algorithms,  which  can  run  on  a  multiprocessor  computer  that  permits  multiple
instructions  to  execute  concurrently.   In  particular,  we shall  explore  the  elegant
model of dynamic multithreaded  algorithms,  which are amenable to algorithmic
design and analysis, as well as to efficient implementation in practice.
Parallel  computers—computers  with multiple  processing  units—have  become
increasingly common, and they span a wide range of prices and performance. Rela-
tively inexpensive desktop and laptopchip multiprocessorscontain a singlemulti-
coreintegrated-circuit chip that houses multiple processing “cores,” each of which
is a full-fledged processor that can access a common memory.  At an intermedi-
ate  price/performance  point  are  clusters  built  from  individual  computers—often
simple PC-class machines—with a dedicated network interconnecting them.  The
highest-priced  machines  are  supercomputers,  which  often  use  a  combination  of
custom architectures  and custom networks to deliver the highest  performance in
terms of instructions executed per second.
Multiprocessor  computers  have  been  around,   in  one  form  or  another,   for
decades.  Although the computing community settled on the random-access  ma-
chine model for serial computing early on in the history of computer science, no
single model for parallel computing has gained as wide acceptance.  A major rea-
son  is that  vendors  have  not  agreed  on  a single  architectural  model  for  parallel
computers.  For example, some parallel computers featureshared memory,where
each processor  can directly access any location of memory.  Other parallel com-
puters employdistributed memory, where each processor’s memory is private, and
an explicit message must be sent between processors in order for one processor to
access the memory of another.  With the advent of multicore technology, however,
every new laptop and desktop machine is now a shared-memory parallel computer,

Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms773
and the trend appears to be toward shared-memory multiprocessing. Although time
will tell, that is the approach we shall take in this chapter.
One common  means  of  programming  chip  multiprocessors  and  other  shared-
memory parallel computers is by usingstatic threading, which provides a software
abstraction of “virtual processors,” orthreads, sharing a common memory.  Each
thread  maintains  an  associated  program  counter  and  can  execute  code  indepen-
dently of the other threads.  The operating system loads a thread onto a processor
for execution and switches it out when another thread needs to run.  Although the
operating system allows programmers to create and destroy threads, these opera-
tions are comparatively slow.  Thus, for most applications,  threads persist for the
duration of a computation, which is why we call them “static.”
Unfortunately, programming a shared-memory parallel computer directly using
static  threads  is difficult  and error-prone.   One reason  is that dynamically  parti-
tioning  the  work  among  the  threads  so  that  each  thread  receives  approximately
the same  load  turns  out  to be a complicated  undertaking.   For any but  the  sim-
plest of applications, the programmer must use complex communication protocols
to implement a scheduler  to load-balance  the work.  This state of affairs has led
toward the creation ofconcurrency platforms, which provide a layer of software
that coordinates, schedules, and manages the parallel-computing resources.  Some
concurrency platforms are built as runtime libraries, but others provide full-fledged
parallel languages with compiler and runtime support.
Dynamic multithreaded programming
One important class of concurrency platform isdynamic multithreading,whichis
the model we shall adopt in this chapter. Dynamic multithreading allows program-
mers to specify parallelism in applications without worrying about communication
protocols,  load balancing,  and other vagaries of static-thread  programming.  The
concurrency platform contains a scheduler, which load-balances the computation
automatically, thereby greatly simplifying the programmer’s chore.  Although the
functionality of dynamic-multithreading environments is still evolving, almost all
support  two  features:  nested  parallelism  and  parallel  loops.   Nested  parallelism
allows  a  subroutine  to  be  “spawned,”  allowing  the  caller  to  proceed  while  the
spawned  subroutine  is computing  its  result.   A  parallel  loop  is  like  an  ordinary
forloop, except that the iterations of the loop can execute concurrently.
These two features form the basis of the model for dynamic multithreading that
we shall study in this chapter.  A key aspect of this model is that the programmer
needs to specify only the logical parallelism within a computation, and the threads
within the underlying concurrency platform schedule and load-balance the compu-
tation among themselves. We shall investigate multithreaded algorithms written for

774Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
this model, as well how the underlying concurrency platform can schedule compu-
tations efficiently.
Our model for dynamic multithreading offers several important advantages:

It is a simple extension of our serial programming model.  We can describe a
multithreaded algorithm by adding to our pseudocode just three “concurrency”
keywords:parallel,spawn,andsync.  Moreover,  if we delete these concur-
rency keywords from the multithreaded pseudocode, the resulting text is serial
pseudocode for the same problem, which we call the “serialization” of the mul-
tithreaded algorithm.

It provides a theoretically clean way to quantify parallelism based on the no-
tions of “work” and “span.”

Many multithreaded  algorithms  involving  nested parallelism  follow naturally
from  the  divide-and-conquer  paradigm.   Moreover,  just  as  serial  divide-and-
conquer algorithms lend themselves to analysis by solving recurrences,  so do
multithreaded algorithms.

The model is faithful to how parallel-computing practice is evolving.  A grow-
ing number of concurrency platforms support one variant or another of dynamic
multithreading, including Cilk [51, 118], Cilk++ [71], OpenMP [59], Task Par-
allel Library [230], and Threading Building Blocks [292].
Section 27.1 introduces the dynamic multithreading model and presents the met-
rics of work, span, and parallelism, which we shall use to analyze multithreaded
algorithms.  Section 27.2 investigates how to multiply matrices with multithread-
ing, and Section 27.3 tackles the tougher problem of multithreading merge sort.
27.1  The basics of dynamic multithreading
We shall begin our exploration  of dynamic multithreading  using the example of
computing Fibonacci numbers recursively.  Recall that the Fibonacci numbers are
defined by recurrence (3.22):
F
0
D0;
F
1
D1;
F
i
DF
i1
CF
i2
fori2:
Here is a simple, recursive, serial algorithm to compute thenth Fibonacci number:

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading775
FIB.0/
F
IB.0/FIB.0/FIB.0/
F
IB.0/
F
IB.1/FIB.1/
F
IB.1/
F
IB.1/
F
IB.1/FIB.1/FIB.1/
F
IB.1/
F
IB.2/
F
IB.2/FIB.2/FIB.2/
F
IB.2/
F
IB.3/FIB.3/
F
IB.3/
F
IB.4/
F
IB.4/
F
IB.5/
F
IB.6/
Figure 27.1The tree of recursive procedure instances when computing FIB.6/.  Each instance of
F
IBwith the same argument does the same work to produce the same result, providing an inefficient
but interesting way to compute Fibonacci numbers.
FIB.n/
1ifn1
2returnn
3elsexDF
IB.n1/
4yDF
IB.n2/
5returnxCy
You would not really want to compute large Fibonacci  numbers this way, be-
cause this computation does much repeated work.  Figure 27.1 shows the tree of
recursive procedure instances that are created when computingF
6
.  For example,
a call to F
IB.6/recursively calls FIB.5/and then FIB.4/.  But, the call to FIB.5/
also results in a call to F
IB.4/.  Both instances  of  FIB.4/return the same result
(F
4
D3).  Since the FIBprocedure does not memoize, the second call to FIB.4/
replicates the work that the first call performs.
LetT .n/denote the running time of F
IB.n/.SinceFIB.n/contains two recur-
sive calls plus a constant amount of extra work, we obtain the recurrence
T .n/DT.n1/CT.n2/C‚.1/ :
This recurrence has solutionT .n/D‚.F
n
/, which we can show using the substi-
tution method.  For an inductive hypothesis, assume thatT .n/aF
n
b,where
a>1andb>0are constants. Substituting, we obtain

776Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
T .n/.aF
n1
b/C.aF
n2
b/C‚.1/
Da.F
n1
CF
n2
/2bC‚.1/
DaF
n
b.b‚.1//
aF
n
b
if we chooseblarge enough to dominate the constant in the‚.1/.  We can then
choosealarge enough to satisfy the initial condition. The analytical bound
T .n/D‚.
n
/;(27.1)
whereD.1C
p
5/=2is the golden ratio,  now follows from equation  (3.25).
SinceF
n
grows exponentially  inn,  this procedure  is a particularly  slow way to
compute Fibonacci numbers. (See Problem 31-3 for much faster ways.)
Although  the  F
IBprocedure  is a poor  way to compute  Fibonacci  numbers,  it
makes a good example for illustrating key concepts in the analysis of multithreaded
algorithms.  Observe that within F
IB.n/, the two recursive calls in lines 3 and 4 to
F
IB.n1/and FIB.n2/, respectively, are independent of each other: they could
be called in either order, and the computation performed by one in no way affects
the other. Therefore, the two recursive calls can run in parallel.
We augment our pseudocode to indicate parallelism by adding theconcurrency
keywordsspawnandsync.  Here is how we can rewrite the F
IBprocedure to use
dynamic multithreading:
P-F
IB.n/
1ifn1
2returnn
3elsexDspawnP-F
IB.n1/
4yDP-F
IB.n2/
5sync
6returnxCy
Notice that if we delete the concurrency keywordsspawnandsyncfrom P-F
IB,
the resulting pseudocode text is identical to F
IB(other than renaming the procedure
in the header and in the two recursive calls).  We define theserializationof a mul-
tithreaded algorithm to be the serial algorithm that results from deleting the multi-
threaded keywords:spawn,sync, and when we examine parallel loops,parallel.
Indeed, our multithreaded pseudocode has the nice property that a serialization is
always ordinary serial pseudocode to solve the same problem.
Nested parallelismoccurs when the keywordspawnprecedes a procedure call,
as in line 3.  The semantics of a spawn differs from an ordinary procedure call in
that the procedure  instance that executes the spawn—theparent—may continue
to execute in parallel with the spawned subroutine—itschild—instead of waiting

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading777
for the child to complete, as would normally happen in a serial execution.  In this
case, while the spawned child is computing P-F
IB.n1/, the parent may go on
to compute P-F
IB.n2/in line 4 in parallel with the spawned child.  Since the
P-F
IBprocedure is recursive, these two subroutine calls themselves create nested
parallelism, as do their children, thereby creating a potentially vast tree of subcom-
putations, all executing in parallel.
The keywordspawndoes not say, however, that a proceduremustexecute con-
currently with its spawned children, only that itmay.  The concurrency keywords
express thelogical parallelismof the computation,  indicating which parts of the
computation may proceed in parallel.  At runtime, it is up to aschedulerto deter-
mine which subcomputations actually run concurrently by assigning them to avail-
able processors  as the computation  unfolds.   We shall  discuss the theory behind
schedulers shortly.
A procedure cannot safely use the values returned by its spawned children until
after it executes asyncstatement,  as in line 5.  The keywordsyncindicates that
the procedure must wait as necessary for all its spawned children to complete be-
fore proceeding  to the statement after thesync.IntheP-F
IBprocedure,  async
is required before thereturnstatement in line 6 to avoid the anomaly that would
occur  ifxandywere summed beforexwas computed.   In addition  to explicit
synchronization provided by thesyncstatement, every procedure executes async
implicitly before it returns,  thus ensuring  that all its children terminate before it
does.
A model for multithreaded execution
It  helps  to  think  of  amultithreaded computation—the  set  of  runtime  instruc-
tions executed by a processor on behalf of a multithreaded program—as a directed
acyclic graphGD.V; E/, called acomputation dag. As an example, Figure 27.2
shows the computation dag that results from computing P-F
IB.4/.  Conceptually,
the vertices inVare instructions, and the edges inErepresent dependencies be-
tween instructions, where.u; /2Emeans that instructionumust execute before
instruction.   For  convenience,  however,  if  a  chain  of  instructions  contains  no
parallel control (nospawn,sync,orreturnfrom a spawn—via either an explicit
returnstatement  or the return that  happens  implicitly  upon reaching  the end of
a procedure),  we may group them into a singlestrand, each of which represents
one or more instructions.  Instructions involving parallel control are not included
in strands, but are represented in the structure of the dag.  For example, if a strand
has two successors, one of them must have been spawned, and a strand with mul-
tiple predecessors indicates the predecessors joined because of asyncstatement.
Thus, in the general case, the setVforms the set of strands, and the setEof di-
rected edges represents dependencies between strands induced by parallel control.

778Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
P-FIB(1)P-FIB(0)
P-FIB(3)
P-FIB(4)
P-FIB(1)
P-FIB(1)
P-FIB(0)
P-FIB(2)
P-FIB(2)
Figure 27.2A directed acyclic graph representing the computation of P-FIB.4/.  Each circle rep-
resents  one  strand,  with black  circles  representing  either  base  cases  or  the  part  of  the procedure
(instance) up to the spawn of P-F
IB.n1/in line 3, shaded circles representing the part of the pro-
cedure that calls P-F
IB.n2/in line 4 up to thesyncin line 5, where it suspends until the spawn of
P-F
IB.n1/returns, and white circles representing the part of the procedure after thesyncwhere
it sumsxandyup to the point where it returns the result.  Each group of strands belonging to the
same procedure is surrounded by a rounded rectangle, lightly shaded for spawned procedures and
heavily shaded for called procedures.   Spawn edges and call edges point downward,  continuation
edges point horizontally to the right, and return edges point upward. Assuming that each strand takes
unit time, the work equals17time units, since there are17strands, and the span is8time units, since
the critical path—shown with shaded edges—contains8strands.
IfGhas a directed path from stranduto strand, we say that the two strands are
(logically) in series. Otherwise, strandsuandare(logically) in parallel.
We can picture a multithreaded computation as a dag of strands embedded in a
tree of procedure instances.  For example, Figure 27.1 shows the tree of procedure
instances for P-F
IB.6/without the detailed structure showing strands. Figure 27.2
zooms in on a section of that tree, showing the strands that constitute each proce-
dure. All directed edges connecting strands run either within a procedure or along
undirected edges in the procedure tree.
We can classify the edges of a computation dag to indicate the kind of dependen-
cies between the various strands.  Acontinuation edge.u; u
0
/, drawn horizontally
in Figure 27.2, connects a stranduto its successoru
0
within the same procedure
instance. When a stranduspawns a strand, the dag contains aspawn edge.u; /,
which points downward in the figure.Call edges, representing normal procedure
calls, also point downward.  Stranduspawning stranddiffers fromucalling
in that a spawn induces a horizontal continuation edge fromuto the strandu
0
fol-

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading779
lowinguin its procedure,  indicating  thatu
0
is free to execute  at the same time
as, whereas a call induces no such edge.  When a strandureturns to its calling
procedure andxis the strand immediately following the nextsyncin the calling
procedure, the computation dag containsreturn edge.u; x/, which points upward.
A computation starts with a singleinitial strand—the black vertex in the procedure
labeled P-F
IB.4/in Figure 27.2—and ends with a singlefinal strand—the white
vertex in the procedure labeled P-F
IB.4/.
We  shall  study  the  execution  of  multithreaded  algorithms  on  anideal paral-
lel computer, which consists of a set of processors and asequentially consistent
shared memory. Sequential consistency means that the shared memory, which may
in reality be performing  many loads and stores  from the processors  at the same
time, produces the same results as if at each step, exactly one instruction from one
of the processors is executed.  That is, the memory behaves as if the instructions
were executed sequentially according to some global linear order that preserves the
individual orders in which each processor issues its own instructions. For dynamic
multithreaded  computations,  which are scheduled  onto  processors  automatically
by the concurrency platform, the shared memory behaves as if the multithreaded
computation’s instructions were interleaved to produce a linear order that preserves
the partial order of the computation dag.  Depending on scheduling,  the ordering
could differ from one run of the program to another, but the behavior of any exe-
cution can be understood by assuming that the instructions are executed in some
linear order consistent with the computation dag.
In addition to making assumptions about semantics, the ideal-parallel-computer
model makes some performance assumptions.   Specifically,  it assumes that each
processor  in the machine has equal computing  power,  and it ignores the cost  of
scheduling.  Although this last assumption may sound optimistic, it turns out that
for algorithms with sufficient “parallelism” (a term we shall define precisely in a
moment), the overhead of scheduling is generally minimal in practice.
Performance measures
We can gauge the theoretical efficiency of a multithreaded algorithm by using two
metrics: “work” and “span.” Theworkof a multithreaded computation is the total
time to execute the entire computation on one processor.  In other words, the work
is the sum of the times taken by each of the strands.   For a computation  dag in
which each strand takes unit time, the work is just the number of vertices in the
dag. Thespanis the longest time to execute the strands along any path in the dag.
Again, for a dag in which each strand takes unit time, the span equals the number of
vertices on a longest orcritical pathin the dag. (Recall from Section 24.2 that we
can find a critical path in a dagGD.V; E/in‚.VCE/time.) For example, the
computation dag of Figure 27.2 has17vertices in all and8vertices on its critical

780Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
path, so that if each strand takes unit time, its work is17time units and its span
is8time units.
The actual  running  time of a multithreaded  computation  depends  not only on
its  work  and  its  span,  but  also  on  how  many  processors  are  available  and  how
the  scheduler  allocates  strands  to  processors.   To  denote  the  running  time  of  a
multithreaded computation onPprocessors, we shall subscript byP. For example,
we might denote the running time of an algorithm onPprocessors byT
P
.The
work is the running time on a single processor, orT
1
. The span is the running time
if we could run each strand on its own processor—in  other words,  if we had an
unlimited number of processors—and so we denote the span byT
1
.
The work and span provide lower bounds on the running timeT
P
of a multi-
threaded computation onPprocessors:

In one step,  an ideal  parallel  computer  withPprocessors  can do at mostP
units of work, and thus inT
P
time, it can perform at mostPT
P
work. Since the
total work to do isT
1
,wehavePT
P
T
1
. Dividing byPyields thework law:
T
P
T
1
=P  :(27.2)

AP-processor  ideal  parallel  computer  cannot  run any faster  than a machine
with an unlimited  number of processors.   Looked at another  way,  a machine
with an unlimited number of processors can emulate aP-processor machine by
using justPof its processors. Thus, thespan lawfollows:
T
P
T
1
:(27.3)
We define thespeedupof a computation onPprocessors by the ratioT
1
=T
P
,
which  says  how  many  times  faster  the  computation  is  onPprocessors  than
on1processor.    By  the  work  law,  we  haveT
P
T
1
=P,  which  implies  that
T
1
=T
P
P.  Thus, the speedup onPprocessors can be at mostP.  When the
speedup is linear in the number of processors, that is, whenT
1
=T
P
D‚.P /,the
computation  exhibitslinear speedup,andwhenT
1
=T
P
DP,wehaveperfect
linear speedup.
The  ratioT
1
=T
1
of  the  work  to  the  span  gives  theparallelismof  the  multi-
threaded computation.  We can view the parallelism from three perspectives.  As a
ratio, the parallelism denotes the average amount of work that can be performed in
parallel for each step along the critical path.  As an upper bound, the parallelism
gives the maximum possible speedup that can be achieved on any number of pro-
cessors.  Finally, and perhaps most important, the parallelism provides a limit on
the possibility of attaining perfect linear speedup. Specifically, once the number of
processors exceeds the parallelism, the computation cannot possibly achieve per-
fect linear speedup. To see this last point, suppose thatP>T
1
=T
1
, in which case

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading781
the span law implies that the speedup satisfiesT
1
=T
P
T
1
=T
1
<P.  Moreover,
if the numberPof processors in the ideal parallel computer greatly exceeds the
parallelism—that is, ifPT
1
=T
1
—thenT
1
=T
P
P, so that the speedup is
much less than the number of processors.  In other words, the more processors we
use beyond the parallelism, the less perfect the speedup.
As an example, consider the computation P-F
IB.4/in Figure 27.2, and assume
that each strand takes unit time. Since the work isT
1
D17and the span isT
1
D8,
the parallelism isT
1
=T
1
D17=8D2:125.  Consequently, achieving much more
than double  the speedup  is impossible,  no matter  how many processors  we em-
ploy to execute the computation.  For larger input sizes, however, we shall see that
P-F
IB.n/exhibits substantial parallelism.
We  define  the(parallel) slacknessof  a  multithreaded  computation  executed
on an ideal  parallel  computer  withPprocessors  to be the ratio.T
1
=T
1
/=PD
T
1
=.P T
1
/, which is the factor  by which the parallelism  of the computation  ex-
ceeds the number of processors in the machine. Thus, if the slackness is less than1,
we cannot hope to achieve perfect linear speedup, becauseT
1
=.P T
1
/<1and the
span law imply that the speedup onPprocessors satisfiesT
1
=T
P
T
1
=T
1
<P.
Indeed, as the slackness decreases from1toward0, the speedup of the computation
diverges further and further from perfect linear speedup. If the slackness is greater
than1, however, the work per processor is the limiting constraint. As we shall see,
as the slackness increases from1, a good scheduler can achieve closer and closer
to perfect linear speedup.
Scheduling
Good performance depends on more than just minimizing the work and span. The
strands must also be scheduled efficiently onto the processors of the parallel ma-
chine.  Our multithreaded programming model provides no way to specify which
strands to execute on which processors.  Instead, we rely on the concurrency plat-
form’s scheduler to map the dynamically unfolding computation to individual pro-
cessors.  In practice, the scheduler maps the strands to static threads, and the op-
erating system schedules the threads on the processors themselves, but this extra
level of indirection  is unnecessary  for our understanding  of scheduling.   We can
just imagine that the concurrency platform’s scheduler maps strands to processors
directly.
A  multithreaded  scheduler  must  schedule  the  computation  with  no  advance
knowledge of when strands will be spawned or when they will complete—it must
operateon-line.   Moreover,  a  good  scheduler  operates  in  a  distributed  fashion,
where the threads implementing the scheduler cooperate to load-balance the com-
putation.  Provably good on-line, distributed schedulers exist, but analyzing them
is complicated.

782Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
Instead, to keep our analysis simple, we shall investigate an on-linecentralized
scheduler, which knows the global state of the computation at any given time.  In
particular,  we shall analyzegreedy schedulers,  which assign as many strands to
processors as possible in each time step.  If at leastPstrands are ready to execute
during a time step, we say that the step is acomplete step, and a greedy scheduler
assigns anyPof the ready strands to processors. Otherwise, fewer thanPstrands
are ready to execute, in which case we say that the step is anincomplete step,and
the scheduler assigns each ready strand to its own processor.
From  the  work  law,  the  best  running  time  we  can  hope  for  onPprocessors
isT
P
DT
1
=P,  and from the span law the best  we can hope for  isT
P
DT
1
.
The following theorem shows that greedy scheduling  is provably good in that it
achieves the sum of these two lower bounds as an upper bound.
Theorem 27.1
On an ideal parallel computer withPprocessors,  a greedy scheduler  executes a
multithreaded computation with workT
1
and spanT
1
in time
T
P
T
1
=PCT
1
:(27.4)
ProofWe start  by considering  the complete  steps.   In each complete  step,  the
Pprocessors  together  perform  a  total  ofPwork.   Suppose  for  the  purpose  of
contradiction  that  the number  of complete  steps is strictly  greater  than
b
T
1
=P
c
.
Then, the total work of the complete steps is at least
P.
b
T
1
=P
c
C1/DP
b
T
1
=P
c
CP
DT
1
.T
1
modP/CP(by equation (3.8))
>T
1
(by inequality (3.9))  .
Thus, we obtain the contradiction that thePprocessors would perform more work
than  the  computation  requires,  which  allows  us  to  conclude  that  the  number  of
complete steps is at most
b
T
1
=P
c
.
Now,  consider  an  incomplete  step.   LetGbe  the  dag  representing  the  entire
computation,  and  without  loss  of  generality,  assume  that  each  strand  takes  unit
time.  (We can replace each longer strand by a chain of unit-time strands.)  LetG
0
be the subgraph ofGthat has yet to be executed at the start of the incomplete step,
and letG
00
be the subgraph remaining to be executed after the incomplete step.  A
longest path in a dag must necessarily start at a vertex with in-degree0.  Since an
incomplete step of a greedy scheduler executes all strands with in-degree0inG
0
,
the length of a longest path inG
00
must be1less than the length of a longest path
inG
0
. In other words, an incomplete step decreases the span of the unexecuted dag
by1. Hence, the number of incomplete steps is at mostT
1
.
Since each step is either complete or incomplete, the theorem follows.

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading783
The following corollary to Theorem 27.1 shows that a greedy scheduler always
performs well.
Corollary 27.2
The  running  timeT
P
of  any  multithreaded  computation  scheduled  by  a  greedy
scheduler on an ideal parallel computer withPprocessors is within a factor of2
of optimal.
ProofLetT

P
be the running time produced by an optimal scheduler on a machine
withPprocessors,  and letT
1
andT
1
be the work and span of the computation,
respectively.  Since the work and span laws—inequalities (27.2) and (27.3)—give
usT

P
max.T
1
=P ; T
1
/, Theorem 27.1 implies that
T
P
T
1
=PCT
1
2max.T
1
=P ; T
1
/
2T

P
:
The next corollary shows that, in fact, a greedy scheduler achieves near-perfect
linear speedup on any multithreaded computation as the slackness grows.
Corollary 27.3
LetT
P
be the running time of a multithreaded computation produced by a greedy
scheduler on an ideal parallel computer withPprocessors, and letT
1
andT
1
be
the work and span of the computation,  respectively.  Then,  ifPT
1
=T
1
,we
haveT
P
T
1
=P, or equivalently, a speedup of approximatelyP.
ProofIf we suppose thatPT
1
=T
1
,thenwealsohaveT
1
T
1
=P,and
hence  Theorem  27.1  gives  usT
P
T
1
=PCT
1
T
1
=P.   Since  the  work
law (27.2) dictates  thatT
P
T
1
=P, we conclude thatT
P
T
1
=P, or equiva-
lently, that the speedup isT
1
=T
P
P.
Thesymbol denotes “much less,” but how much is “much less”?  As a rule
of thumb, a slackness of at least10—that is,10times more parallelism than pro-
cessors—generally suffices to achieve good speedup.  Then, the span term in the
greedy bound, inequality (27.4), is less than10% of the work-per-processor term,
which is good enough for most engineering situations. For example, if a computa-
tion runs on only 10 or 100 processors, it doesn’t make sense to value parallelism
of, say 1,000,000 over parallelism  of 10,000,  even with the factor of 100 differ-
ence.   As Problem 27-2 shows,  sometimes by reducing  extreme parallelism,  we
can obtain algorithms that are better with respect to other concerns and which still
scale up well on reasonable numbers of processors.

784Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
A
(a)(b)
B
A
B
Work:T
1
.A[B/DT
1
.A/CT
1
.B/
Span:T
1
.A[B/DT
1
.A/CT
1
.B/
Work:T
1
.A[B/DT
1
.A/CT
1
.B/
Span:T
1
.A[B/Dmax.T
1
.A/; T
1
.B/)
Figure 27.3The work and span of composed subcomputations.(a)When two subcomputations
are  joined  in  series,  the  work  of  the  composition  is  the  sum  of  their  work,  and  the  span  of  the
composition is the sum of their spans.(b)When two subcomputations  are joined in parallel,  the
work of the composition remains the sum of their work, but the span of the composition is only the
maximum of their spans.
Analyzing multithreaded algorithms
We now have all the tools we need to analyze multithreaded algorithms and provide
good bounds on their running times on various numbers of processors.  Analyzing
the work is relatively straightforward, since it amounts to nothing more than ana-
lyzing the running time of an ordinary serial algorithm—namely, the serialization
of the multithreaded algorithm—which you should already be familiar with, since
that is what most of this textbook is about! Analyzing the span is more interesting,
but generally no harder once you get the hang of it.  We shall investigate the basic
ideas using the P-F
IBprogram.
Analyzing the workT
1
.n/of P-FIB.n/poses no hurdles, because we’ve already
done it.  The original F
IBprocedure is essentially the serialization of P-FIB,and
henceT
1
.n/DT .n/D‚.
n
/from equation (27.1).
Figure  27.3  illustrates  how  to  analyze  the  span.   If  two  subcomputations  are
joined  in series,  their  spans add to form the span of their composition,  whereas
if they are joined in parallel, the span of their composition is the maximum of the
spans of the two subcomputations. For P-F
IB.n/, the spawned call to P-FIB.n1/
in line 3 runs in parallel with the call to P-F
IB.n2/in line 4.  Hence, we can
express the span of P-F
IB.n/as the recurrence
T
1
.n/Dmax.T
1
.n1/; T
1
.n2//C‚.1/
DT
1
.n1/C‚.1/ ;
which has solutionT
1
.n/D‚.n/.
The parallelism  of  P-F
IB.n/isT
1
.n/=T
1
.n/D‚.
n
=n/,  which grows dra-
matically asngets large.  Thus, on even the largest parallel computers, a modest

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading785
value fornsuffices to achieve near perfect linear speedup for P-FIB.n/, because
this procedure exhibits considerable parallel slackness.
Parallel loops
Many algorithms contain loops all of whose iterations can operate in parallel.  As
we shall see, we can parallelize such loops using thespawnandsynckeywords,
but it is much more convenient to specify directly that the iterations of such loops
can run concurrently.  Our pseudocode provides this functionality via theparallel
concurrency keyword, which precedes theforkeyword in aforloop statement.
As an example, consider the problem of multiplying ann	nmatrixAD.a
ij
/
by ann-vectorxD.x
j
/. The resultingn-vectoryD.y
i
/is given by the equation
y
i
D
n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
;
foriD1;2;:::;n. We can perform matrix-vector multiplication by computing all
the entries ofyin parallel as follows:
M
AT-VEC.A; x/
1nDA:rows
2letybe a new vector of lengthn
3parallel foriD1ton
4y
i
D0
5parallel foriD1ton
6forjD1ton
7y
i
Dy
i
Ca
ij
x
j
8returny
In  this  code,  theparallel forkeywords  in  lines  3  and  5  indicate  that  the  itera-
tions of the respective loops may be run concurrently.  A compiler can implement
eachparallel forloop as a divide-and-conquer subroutine using nested parallelism.
For example, theparallel forloop in lines 5–7 can be implemented with the call
M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP.A;x;y;n;1;n/, where the compiler produces the auxil-
iary subroutine M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOPas follows:

786Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
1,12,23,34,45,56,67,78,8
1,23,45,67,8
1,45,8
1,8
Figure 27.4A dag representing the computation of MAT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP.A;x;y;8;1;8/.The
two numbers within each rounded rectangle give the values of the last two parameters (iandi
0
in
the procedure header) in the invocation (spawn or call) of the procedure.  The black circles repre-
sent strands corresponding to either the base case or the part of the procedure up to the spawn of
M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOPin line 5; the shaded circles represent strands corresponding to the part of
the procedure that calls M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOPin line 6 up to thesyncin line 7, where it suspends
until the spawned subroutine in line 5 returns; and the white circles represent strands corresponding
to the (negligible) part of the procedure after thesyncup to the point where it returns.
MAT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP.A;x;y;n;i;i
0
/
1ifi
==i
0
2forjD1ton
3y
i
Dy
i
Ca
ij
x
j
4elsemidD
b
.iCi
0
/=2
c
5spawnM
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP.A;x;y;n;i;mid/
6M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP.A;x;y;n;midC1; i
0
/
7sync
This code recursively spawns the first half of the iterations of the loop to execute
in parallel with the second half of the iterations and then executes async, thereby
creating a binary tree of execution where the leaves are individual loop iterations,
as shown in Figure 27.4.
To calculate the workT
1
.n/of MAT-VECon ann	nmatrix, we simply compute
the running time of its serialization, which we obtain by replacing theparallel for
loops with ordinaryforloops.  Thus, we haveT
1
.n/D‚.n
2
/, because the qua-
dratic running time of the doubly nested loops in lines 5–7 dominates. This analysis

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading787
seems to ignore the overhead for recursive spawning in implementing the parallel
loops, however. In fact, the overhead of recursive spawning does increase the work
of a parallel loop compared with that of its serialization,  but not asymptotically.
To see why, observe that since the tree of recursive procedure instances is a full
binary tree, the number of internal nodes is1fewer than the number of leaves (see
Exercise B.5-3). Each internal node performs constant work to divide the iteration
range, and each leaf corresponds to an iteration of the loop, which takes at least
constant time (‚.n/time in this case).  Thus, we can amortize the overhead of re-
cursive spawning against the work of the iterations, contributing at most a constant
factor to the overall work.
As a practical matter, dynamic-multithreading concurrency platforms sometimes
coarsenthe leaves of the recursion by executing several iterations in a single leaf,
either automatically or under programmer control, thereby reducing the overhead
of recursive spawning. This reduced overhead comes at the expense of also reduc-
ing the parallelism, however, but if the computation has sufficient parallel slack-
ness, near-perfect linear speedup need not be sacrificed.
We must also account for the overhead of recursive spawning when analyzing the
span of a parallel-loop construct. Since the depth of recursive calling is logarithmic
in the number of iterations,  for a parallel loop withniterations in which theith
iteration has spaniter
1
.i /, the span is
T
1
.n/D‚.lgn/Cmax
1in
iter
1
.i / :
For example, for M
AT-VECon ann	nmatrix, the parallel initialization loop in
lines 3–4 has span‚.lgn/, because the recursive spawning dominates the constant-
time  work  of  each  iteration.   The  span  of  the  doubly  nested  loops  in  lines  5–7
is‚.n/, because each iteration of the outerparallel forloop containsniterations
of the inner  (serial)forloop.   The span of  the remaining  code in the procedure
is constant,  and thus the span is dominated by the doubly nested loops,  yielding
an overall  span of‚.n/for the whole procedure.   Since the work is‚.n
2
/,the
parallelism  is‚.n
2
/=‚.n/D‚.n/.   (Exercise  27.1-6  asks  you  to  provide  an
implementation with even more parallelism.)
Race conditions
A multithreaded algorithm isdeterministicif it always does the same thing on the
same input,  no matter how the instructions are scheduled on the multicore com-
puter.  It isnondeterministicif its behavior might vary from run to run.  Often, a
multithreaded algorithm that is intended to be deterministic fails to be, because it
contains a “determinacy race.”
Race  conditions  are  the  bane  of  concurrency.   Famous  race  bugs  include  the
Therac-25 radiation therapy machine, which killed three people and injured sev-

788Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
eral others, and the North American Blackout of 2003, which left over 50 million
people without power. These pernicious bugs are notoriously hard to find. You can
run tests in the lab for days without a failure only to discover that your software
sporadically crashes in the field.
Adeterminacy raceoccurs when two logically parallel instructions access the
same memory location and at least one of the instructions performs a write.  The
following procedure illustrates a race condition:
R
ACE-EXAMPLE./
1xD0
2parallel foriD1to2
3xDxC1
4printx
After initializingxto0in line 1,  R
ACE-EXAMPLEcreates two parallel strands,
each  of  which  incrementsxin  line  3.    Although  it  might  seem  that  R
ACE-
E
XAMPLEshould always print the value2(its serialization certainly does), it could
instead print the value1. Let’s see how this anomaly might occur.
When a processor incrementsx, the operation is not indivisible, but is composed
of a sequence of instructions:
1.   Readxfrom memory into one of the processor’s registers.
2.   Increment the value in the register.
3.   Write the value in the register back intoxin memory.
Figure 27.5(a) illustrates a computation dag representing the execution of R
ACE-
E
XAMPLE,  with the strands broken  down to individual  instructions.   Recall that
since an ideal parallel computer supports sequential consistency, we can view the
parallel execution of a multithreaded algorithm as an interleaving of instructions
that respects the dependencies in the dag.  Part (b) of the figure shows the values
in an execution of the computation that elicits the anomaly.  The valuexis stored
in memory, andr
1
andr
2
are processor registers.  In step 1, one of the processors
setsxto0.  In steps 2 and 3, processor 1 readsxfrom memory into its registerr
1
and increments it, producing the value1inr
1
.  At that point, processor 2 comes
into the picture, executing instructions 4–6. Processor 2 readsxfrom memory into
registerr
2
; increments it, producing the value1inr
2
; and then stores this value
intox, settingxto1.  Now, processor 1 resumes with step 7, storing the value1
inr
1
intox, which leaves the value ofxunchanged.  Therefore, step 8 prints the
value1, rather than2, as the serialization would print.
We can see what has happened.  If the effect of the parallel execution were that
processor 1 executed all its instructions before processor 2, the value2would be

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading789
incrr
1
3
r
1
 =x2
x = r
1
7
incrr
2
5
r
2
 =  x4
x = r
2
6
x = 01
printx8
(a)
stepxr
1
r
2
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
0
0
0
0
0
1
1
–
0
1
1
1
1
1
–
–
–
0
1
1
1
(b)
Figure 27.5Illustration of the determinacy race in RACE-EXAMPLE.(a)A computation dag show-
ing the dependencies among individual instructions.  The processor registers arer
1
andr
2
.  Instruc-
tions unrelated to the race, such as the implementation of loop control, are omitted.(b)An execution
sequence that elicits the bug, showing the values ofxin memory and registersr
1
andr
2
for each
step in the execution sequence.
printed. Conversely, if the effect were that processor 2 executed all its instructions
before processor 1, the value2would still be printed. When the instructions of the
two processors execute at the same time, however, it is possible, as in this example
execution, that one of the updates toxis lost.
Of course, many executions do not elicit the bug.  For example, if the execution
order wereh1; 2; 3; 7; 4; 5; 6; 8iorh1; 4; 5; 6; 2; 3; 7; 8i, we would get the cor-
rect result.  That’s the problem with determinacy races.  Generally, most orderings
produce correct results—such as any in which the instructions on the left execute
before the instructions  on the right,  or vice versa.   But some orderings  generate
improper results when the instructions interleave.  Consequently, races can be ex-
tremely hard to test for.  You can run tests for days and never see the bug, only to
experience a catastrophic system crash in the field when the outcome is critical.
Although we can cope with races in a variety of ways, including using mutual-
exclusion locks and other methods of synchronization, for our purposes, we shall
simply ensure that strands that operate in parallel areindependent:theyhaveno
determinacy races among them. Thus, in aparallel forconstruct, all the iterations
should be independent.  Between aspawnand the correspondingsync, the code
of the spawned child should be independent  of the code of the parent,  including
code executed by additional spawned or called children.  Note that arguments to a
spawned child are evaluated in the parent before the actual spawn occurs, and thus
the evaluation of arguments to a spawned subroutine is in series with any accesses
to those arguments after the spawn.

790Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
As an example of how easy it is to generate code with races,  here is a faulty
implementation of multithreaded matrix-vector multiplication that achieves a span
of‚.lgn/by parallelizing the innerforloop:
M
AT-VEC-WRONG.A; x/
1nDA:rows
2letybe a new vector of lengthn
3parallel foriD1ton
4y
i
D0
5parallel foriD1ton
6parallel forjD1ton
7y
i
Dy
i
Ca
ij
x
j
8returny
This procedure is, unfortunately,  incorrect  due to races on updatingy
i
in line 7,
which executes concurrently for allnvalues ofj. Exercise 27.1-6 asks you to give
a correct implementation with‚.lgn/span.
A multithreaded algorithm with races can sometimes be correct.  As an exam-
ple, two parallel threads might store the same value into a shared variable, and it
wouldn’t matter which stored the value first. Generally, however, we shall consider
code with races to be illegal.
A chess lesson
We close this section  with a true story that  occurred  during  the development  of
the world-class multithreaded chess-playing program?Socrates [80], although the
timings below have been simplified for exposition.  The program was prototyped
on a32-processor computer but was ultimately to run on a supercomputer with512
processors. At one point, the developers incorporated an optimization into the pro-
gram that reduced its running time on an important benchmark on the32-processor
machine fromT
32
D65seconds toT
0
32
D40seconds.  Yet, the developers used
the work and span performance measures to conclude that the optimized version,
which was faster on32processors, would actually be slower than the original ver-
sion on512processsors. As a result, they abandoned the “optimization.”
Here is their analysis. The original version of the program had workT
1
D2048
seconds and spanT
1
D1second.  If we treat inequality  (27.4) as an equation,
T
P
DT
1
=PCT
1
, and use it as an approximation to the running time onPpro-
cessors, we see that indeedT
32
D2048=32C1D65.  With the optimization, the
work becameT
0
1
D1024seconds and the span becameT
0
1
D8seconds.  Again
using our approximation, we getT
0
32
D1024=32C8D40.
The relative speeds of the two versions switch when we calculate the running
times on512processors, however. In particular, we haveT
512
D2048=512C1D5

27.1The basics of dynamic multithreading791
seconds, andT
0
512
D1024=512C8D10seconds.  The optimization that sped up
the program on32processors would have made the program twice as slow on512
processors! The optimized version’s span of8, which was not the dominant term in
the running time on32processors, became the dominant term on512processors,
nullifying the advantage from using more processors.
The  moral  of  the  story  is  that  work  and  span  can  provide  a  better  means  of
extrapolating performance than can measured running times.
Exercises
27.1-1
Suppose  that  we spawn  P-F
IB.n2/in  line  4 of  P-FIB,  rather  than  calling  it
as  is  done  in  the  code.   What  is  the  impact  on  the  asymptotic  work,  span,  and
parallelism?
27.1-2
Draw the computation dag that results from executing  P-F
IB.5/.  Assuming that
each strand in the computation takes unit time, what are the work, span, and par-
allelism of the computation? Show how to schedule the dag on3processors using
greedy scheduling by labeling each strand with the time step in which it is executed.
27.1-3
Prove that a greedy scheduler achieves the following time bound, which is slightly
stronger than the bound proven in Theorem 27.1:
T
P

T
1
T
1
P
CT
1
:(27.5)
27.1-4
Construct a computation dag for which one execution of a greedy scheduler can
take nearly twice the time of another execution of a greedy scheduler on the same
number of processors. Describe how the two executions would proceed.
27.1-5
Professor  Karan  measures  her  deterministic  multithreaded  algorithm  on4,10,
and64processors  of  an  ideal  parallel  computer  using  a  greedy  scheduler.   She
claims  that  the  three  runs  yieldedT
4
D80seconds,T
10
D42seconds,  and
T
64
D10seconds.  Argue that the professor is either lying or incompetent.  (Hint:
Use the  work law (27.2),  the  span  law (27.3),  and  inequality  (27.5)  from  Exer-
cise 27.1-3.)

792Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
27.1-6
Give a multithreaded  algorithm  to multiply ann	nmatrix by ann-vector that
achieves‚.n
2
=lgn/parallelism while maintaining‚.n
2
/work.
27.1-7
Consider the following multithreaded pseudocode for transposing ann	nmatrixA
in place:
P-T
RANSPOSE.A/
1nDA:rows
2parallel forjD2ton
3parallel foriD1toj1
4exchangea
ij
witha
ji
Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of this algorithm.
27.1-8
Suppose that we replace theparallel forloop in line 3 of P-T
RANSPOSE(see Ex-
ercise 27.1-7) with an ordinaryforloop.  Analyze the work, span, and parallelism
of the resulting algorithm.
27.1-9
For how many processors do the two versions of the chess programs run equally
fast, assuming thatT
P
DT
1
=PCT
1
?
27.2  Multithreaded matrix multiplication
In this section,  we examine how to multithread matrix multiplication,  a problem
whose serial running time we studied in Section 4.2.  We’ll look at multithreaded
algorithms based on the standard triply nested loop, as well as divide-and-conquer
algorithms.
Multithreaded matrix multiplication
The first algorithm we study is the straighforward algorithm based on parallelizing
the loops in the procedure S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYon page 75:

27.2    Multithreaded matrix multiplication793
P-SQUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY.A; B/
1nDA:rows
2letCbeanewnnmatrix
3parallel foriD1ton
4parallel forjD1ton
5c
ij
D0
6forkD1ton
7c
ij
Dc
ij
Ca
ik
b
kj
8returnC
To analyze this algorithm, observe that since the serialization of the algorithm is
just S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY, the work is therefore simplyT
1
.n/D‚.n
3
/,
the  same  as  the  running  time  of  S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY.The  span  is
T
1
.n/D‚.n/,  because  it  follows  a  path  down  the  tree  of  recursion  for  the
parallel forloop starting in line 3, then down the tree of recursion for theparallel
forloop starting in line 4, and then executes allniterations of the ordinaryforloop
starting in line 6, resulting in a total span of‚.lgn/C‚.lgn/C‚.n/D‚.n/.
Thus, the parallelism is‚.n
3
/=‚.n/D‚.n
2
/.  Exercise 27.2-3 asks you to par-
allelize the inner loop to obtain a parallelism of‚.n
3
=lgn/, which you cannot do
straightforwardly usingparallel for, because you would create races.
A divide-and-conquer multithreaded algorithm formatrix multiplication
As  we  learned  in  Section  4.2,  we  can  multiplynnmatrices  serially  in  time
‚.n
lg7
/DO.n
2:81
/using Strassen’s divide-and-conquer strategy, which motivates
us to look at multithreading such an algorithm. We begin, as we did in Section 4.2,
with multithreading a simpler divide-and-conquer algorithm.
Recall from page 77 that the S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEproce-
dure, which multiplies twonnmatricesAandBto produce thennmatrixC,
relies on partitioning each of the three matrices into fourn=2n=2submatrices:
AD

A
11
A
12
A
21
A
22

;BD

B
11
B
12
B
21
B
22

;CD

C
11
C
12
C
21
C
22

:
Then, we can write the matrix product as

C
11
C
12
C
21
C
22

D

A
11
A
12
A
21
A
22

B
11
B
12
B
21
B
22

D

A
11
B
11
A
11
B
12
A
21
B
11
A
21
B
12

C

A
12
B
21
A
12
B
22
A
22
B
21
A
22
B
22

:(27.6)
Thus, to multiply twonnmatrices, we perform eight multiplications ofn=2n=2
matrices and one addition ofnnmatrices. The following pseudocode implements

794Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
this  divide-and-conquer  strategy  using  nested  parallelism.   Unlike the  SQUARE-
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEprocedure  on  which  it  is  based,  P-MAT R I X-
M
ULTIPLY-RECURSIVEtakes the output matrix as a parameter to avoid allocating
matrices unnecessarily.
P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.C;A;B/
1nDA:rows
2ifn
==1
3c
11
Da
11
b
11
4elseletTbeanewn	nmatrix
5partitionA,B,C,andTinton=2	n=2submatrices
A
11
;A
12
;A
21
;A
22
;B
11
;B
12
;B
21
;B
22
;C
11
;C
12
;C
21
;C
22
;
andT
11
;T
12
;T
21
;T
22
; respectively
6spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.C
11
;A
11
;B
11
/
7spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.C
12
;A
11
;B
12
/
8spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.C
21
;A
21
;B
11
/
9spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.C
22
;A
21
;B
12
/
10spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.T
11
;A
12
;B
21
/
11spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.T
12
;A
12
;B
22
/
12spawnP-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.T
21
;A
22
;B
21
/
13P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.T
22
;A
22
;B
22
/
14sync
15parallel foriD1ton
16parallel forjD1ton
17c
ij
Dc
ij
Ct
ij
Line 3 handles the base case, where we are multiplying1	1matrices. We handle
the recursive case in lines 4–17.  We allocate a temporary matrixTin line 4, and
line 5 partitions each of the matricesA,B,C,andTinton=2	n=2submatrices.
(As with  S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEon page 77,  we gloss over
the minor issue of how to use index calculations to represent submatrix sections
of a matrix.)  The recursive call in line 6 sets the submatrixC
11
to the submatrix
productA
11
B
11
,sothatC
11
equals the first of the two terms that form its sum in
equation (27.6).  Similarly, lines 7–9 setC
12
,C
21
,andC
22
to the first of the two
terms that equal their sums in equation (27.6).  Line 10 sets the submatrixT
11
to
the submatrix productA
12
B
21
,sothatT
11
equals the second of the two terms that
formC
11
’s sum.  Lines 11–13 setT
12
,T
21
,andT
22
to the second of the two terms
that form the sums ofC
12
,C
21
,andC
22
, respectively.  The first seven recursive
calls are spawned, and the last one runs in the main strand.  Thesyncstatement in
line 14 ensures that all the submatrix products in lines 6–13 have been computed,

27.2    Multithreaded matrix multiplication795
after which we add the products fromTintoCin using the doubly nestedparallel
forloops in lines 15–17.
We  first  analyze  the  workM
1
.n/of  the  P-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE
procedure,  echoing  the  serial  running-time  analysis  of  its  progenitor  SQUARE-
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE. In the recursive case, we partition in‚.1/time,
perform eight recursive multiplications ofn=2	n=2matrices, and finish up with
the‚.n
2
/work  from  adding  twon	nmatrices.   Thus,  the  recurrence  for  the
workM
1
.n/is
M
1
.n/D8M
1
.n=2/C‚.n
2
/
D‚.n
3
/
by case 1 of the master theorem. In other words, the work of our multithreaded al-
gorithm is asymptotically the same as the running time of the procedure S
QUARE-
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLYin Section 4.2, with its triply nested loops.
To determine the spanM
1
.n/of P-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,wefirst
observe that the span for partitioning is‚.1/, which is dominated by the‚.lgn/
span of  the doubly  nestedparallel forloops  in lines 15–17.   Because  the eight
parallel recursive calls all execute on matrices of the same size, the maximum span
for any recursive call is just the span of any one.  Hence,  the recurrence  for the
spanM
1
.n/of P-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEis
M
1
.n/DM
1
.n=2/C‚.lgn/ :(27.7)
This recurrence  does  not  fall  under  any of  the cases  of the master  theorem,  but
it  does  meet  the  condition  of  Exercise  4.6-2.   By Exercise  4.6-2,  therefore,  the
solution to recurrence (27.7) isM
1
.n/D‚.lg
2
n/.
Now that we know the work and span of P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,
we can compute its parallelism asM
1
.n/=M
1
.n/D‚.n
3
=lg
2
n/, which is very
high.
Multithreading Strassen’s method
To  multithread  Strassen’s  algorithm,  we  follow  the  same  general  outline  as  on
page 79, only using nested parallelism:
1.  Divide the input matricesAandBand output matrixCinton=2	n=2sub-
matrices, as in equation (27.6).  This step takes‚.1/workandspanbyindex
calculation.
2.  Create10matricesS
1
;S
2
;:::;S
10
, each of which isn=2	n=2and is the sum
or difference of two matrices created in step 1.  We can create all10matrices
with‚.n
2
/work and‚.lgn/span by using doubly nestedparallel forloops.

796Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
3.   Using  the  submatrices  created  in  step  1  and  the10matrices  created  in
step 2, recursively spawn the computation of sevenn=2	n=2matrix products
P
1
;P
2
;:::;P
7
.
4.   Compute the desired submatricesC
11
;C
12
;C
21
;C
22
of the result matrixCby
adding  and  subtracting  various  combinations  of  theP
i
matrices,  once  again
using doubly nestedparallel forloops.  We can compute all four submatrices
with‚.n
2
/work and‚.lgn/span.
To  analyze  this  algorithm,  we  first  observe  that  since  the  serialization  is  the
same  as  the  original  serial  algorithm,  the  work  is  just  the  running  time  of  the
serialization,  namely,‚.n
lg7
/.AsforP-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,we
can  devise  a  recurrence  for  the  span.    In  this  case,  seven  recursive  calls  exe-
cute in parallel,  but since they all operate  on matrices of the same size,  we ob-
tain the same recurrence (27.7) as we did for P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,
which  has  solution‚.lg
2
n/.   Thus,  the  parallelism  of  multithreaded  Strassen’s
method is‚.n
lg7
=lg
2
n/, which is high, though slightly less than the parallelism
of P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.
Exercises
27.2-1
Draw the computation dag for computing P-S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYon2	2
matrices,  labeling how the vertices in your diagram correspond to strands in the
execution of the algorithm.   Use the convention  that spawn and call edges point
downward,  continuation  edges  point  horizontally  to  the  right,  and  return  edges
point upward.  Assuming that each strand takes unit time, analyze the work, span,
and parallelism of this computation.
27.2-2
Repeat Exercise 27.2-1 for P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.
27.2-3
Give pseudocode for a multithreaded algorithm that multiplies twon	nmatrices
with work‚.n
3
/but span only‚.lgn/. Analyze your algorithm.
27.2-4
Give pseudocode for an efficient multithreaded algorithm that multiplies ap	q
matrix by aq	rmatrix.  Your algorithm should be highly parallel even if any of
p,q,andrare1. Analyze your algorithm.

27.3    Multithreaded merge sort797
27.2-5
Give pseudocode for an efficient multithreaded algorithm that transposes ann	n
matrix in place by using divide-and-conquer  to divide the matrix recursively into
fourn=2	n=2submatrices. Analyze your algorithm.
27.2-6
Give  pseudocode  for  an  efficient  multithreaded  implementation  of  the  Floyd-
Warshall algorithm (see Section 25.2), which computes shortest paths between all
pairs of vertices in an edge-weighted graph. Analyze your algorithm.
27.3  Multithreaded merge sort
We first saw serial merge sort in Section 2.3.1, and in Section 2.3.2 we analyzed its
running time and showed it to be‚.nlgn/.  Because merge sort already uses the
divide-and-conquer paradigm, it seems like a terrific candidate for multithreading
using nested parallelism.   We can easily modify the pseudocode  so that the first
recursive call is spawned:
M
ERGE-SORT
0
.A;p;r/
1ifp<r
2qD
b
.pCr/=2
c
3spawnM
ERGE-SORT
0
.A;p;q/
4M
ERGE-SORT
0
.A; qC1; r /
5sync
6M
ERGE.A;p;q;r/
Like its serial counterpart,  M
ERGE-SORT
0
sorts the subarrayAŒp : : r .  After the
two recursive subroutines in lines 3 and 4 have completed, which is ensured by the
syncstatement in line 5, M
ERGE-SORT
0
calls the same MERGEprocedure as on
page 31.
Let us analyze M
ERGE-SORT
0
. To do so, we first need to analyze MERGE.Re-
call that its serial running time to mergenelements is‚.n/.  Because M
ERGEis
serial, both its work and its span are‚.n/. Thus, the following recurrence charac-
terizes the workMS
0
1
.n/of MERGE-SORT
0
onnelements:
MS
0
1
.n/D2MS
0
1
.n=2/C‚.n/
D‚.nlgn/ ;

798Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
.........
......
mergemergecopy
p
1
q
1
r
1
p
2
q
2
r
2
p
3
q
3
r
3
A
T
x
x
x
x<x
x
xx
Figure 27.6The  idea  behind  the  multithreaded  merging  of  two  sorted  subarraysTŒp
1
::r
1

andTŒp
2
::r
2
into the subarrayAŒp
3
::r
3
. LettingxDTŒq
1
be the median ofTŒp
1
::r
1
andq
2
be the place inTŒp
2
::r
2
such thatxwould fall betweenTŒq
2
1andTŒq
2
, every element in
subarraysTŒp
1
::q
1
1andTŒp
2
::q
2
1(lightly shaded) is less than or equal tox,andevery
element in the subarraysTŒq
1
C1::r
1
andTŒq
2
C1::r
2
(heavily shaded) is at leastx.Tomerge,
we compute the indexq
3
wherexbelongs inAŒp
3
::r
3
,copyxintoAŒq
3
, and then recursively
mergeTŒp
1
::q
1
1withTŒp
2
::q
2
1intoAŒp
3
::q
3
1andTŒq
1
C1::r
1
withTŒq
2
::r
2

intoAŒq
3
C1::r
3
.
which is the same as the serial running time of merge sort. Since the two recursive
calls of M
ERGE-SORT
0
can run in parallel, the spanMS
0
1
is given by the recurrence
MS
0
1
.n/DMS
0
1
.n=2/C‚.n/
D‚.n/ :
Thus,  the parallelism  of  M
ERGE-SORT
0
comes toMS
0
1
.n/=MS
0
1
.n/D‚.lgn/,
which is an unimpressive amount of parallelism.  To sort 10 million elements, for
example,  it  might  achieve  linear  speedup  on a few processors,  but  it  would  not
scale up effectively to hundreds of processors.
You probably  have  already  figured  out  where  the  parallelism  bottleneck  is in
this multithreaded  merge sort:  the serial  M
ERGEprocedure.   Although  merging
might initially seem to be inherently serial, we can, in fact, fashion a multithreaded
version of it by using nested parallelism.
Our  divide-and-conquer  strategy  for  multithreaded  merging,  which  is  illus-
trated  in  Figure  27.6,  operates  on  subarrays  of  an  arrayT.   Suppose  that  we
are  merging  the  two  sorted  subarraysTŒp
1
::r
1
of  lengthn
1
Dr
1
p
1
C1
andTŒp
2
::r
2
of lengthn
2
Dr
2
p
2
C1into another subarrayAŒp
3
::r
3
,of
lengthn
3
Dr
3
p
3
C1Dn
1
Cn
2
. Without loss of generality, we make the sim-
plifying assumption thatn
1
n
2
.
We  first  find  the  middle  elementxDTŒq
1
of  the  subarrayTŒp
1
::r
1
,
whereq
1
D
b
.p
1
Cr
1
/=2
c
.    Because  the  subarray  is  sorted,xisamedian
ofTŒp
1
::r
1
:  every element inTŒp
1
::q
1
1is no more thanx,andeveryel-
ement inTŒq
1
C1::r
1
is no less thanx.  We then use binary search to find the

27.3    Multithreaded merge sort799
indexq
2
in the subarrayTŒp
2
::r
2
so that the subarray would still be sorted if we
insertedxbetweenTŒq
2
1andTŒq
2
.
We next merge the original subarraysTŒp
1
::r
1
andTŒp
2
::r
2
intoAŒp
3
::r
3

as follows:
1.  Setq
3
Dp
3
C.q
1
p
1
/C.q
2
p
2
/.
2.  CopyxintoAŒq
3
.
3.  Recursively mergeTŒp
1
::q
1
1withTŒp
2
::q
2
1, and place the result into
the subarrayAŒp
3
::q
3
1.
4.  Recursively mergeTŒq
1
C1::r
1
withTŒq
2
::r
2
, and place the result into the
subarrayAŒq
3
C1::r
3
.
When we computeq
3
, the quantityq
1
p
1
is the number of elements in the subarray
TŒp
1
::q
1
1, and the quantityq
2
p
2
is the number of elements in the subarray
TŒp
2
::q
2
1. Thus, their sum is the number of elements that end up beforexin
the subarrayAŒp
3
::r
3
.
The base  case  occurs  whenn
1
Dn
2
D0,  in  which  case  we have  no  work
to do to merge  the two empty subarrays.   Since  we have  assumed  that  the sub-
arrayTŒp
1
::r
1
is at least as long asTŒp
2
::r
2
,thatis,n
1
n
2
, we can check
for the base case by just checking whethern
1
D0.  We must also ensure that the
recursion properly handles the case when only one of the two subarrays is empty,
which, by our assumption thatn
1
n
2
, must be the subarrayTŒp
2
::r
2
.
Now,  let’s  put  these  ideas  into  pseudocode.   We start  with  the binary  search,
which  we  express  serially.   The  procedure  B
INARY-SEARCH.x;T;p;r/takes  a
keyxand a subarrayTŒp::r, and it returns one of the following:

IfTŒp::ris empty (r<p), then it returns the indexp.

IfxTŒp, and hence less than or equal to all the elements ofTŒp::r,then
it returns the indexp.

Ifx>TŒp, then it returns the largest indexqin the rangep<qrC1such
thatTŒq1 < x.
Here is the pseudocode:
B
INARY-SEARCH.x;T;p;r/
1lowDp
2highDmax.p; rC1/
3whilelow<high
4midD
b
.lowChigh/=2
c
5ifxTŒmid
6highDmid
7elselowDmidC1
8returnhigh

800Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
The call BINARY-SEARCH.x;T;p;r/takes‚.lgn/serial time in the worst case,
wherenDrpC1is the size of the subarray  on which it runs.   (See Exer-
cise 2.3-5.) Since B
INARY-SEARCHis a serial procedure, its worst-case work and
span are both‚.lgn/.
We are now prepared to write pseudocode  for the multithreaded merging pro-
cedure itself.   Like the  M
ERGEprocedure  on page 31,  the  P-MERGEprocedure
assumes  that  the  two  subarrays  to  be  merged  lie  within  the  same  array.    Un-
like  M
ERGE,however,P-MERGEdoes  not  assume  that  the  two  subarrays  to
be  merged  are  adjacent  within  the  array.   (That  is,  P-M
ERGEdoes  not  require
thatp
2
Dr
1
C1.)   Another  difference  between  MERGEand  P-MERGEis that
P-M
ERGEtakes as an argument an output subarrayAinto which the merged val-
ues should be stored. The call P-M
ERGE.T; p
1
;r
1
;p
2
;r
2
;A;p
3
/merges the sorted
subarraysTŒp
1
::r
1
andTŒp
2
::r
2
into  the  subarrayAŒp
3
::r
3
,wherer
3
D
p
3
C.r
1
p
1
C1/C.r
2
p
2
C1/1Dp
3
C.r
1
p
1
/C.r
2
p
2
/C1and
is not provided as an input.
P-M
ERGE.T; p
1
;r
1
;p
2
;r
2
;A;p
3
/
1n
1
Dr
1
p
1
C1
2n
2
Dr
2
p
2
C1
3ifn
1
<n
2
//ensure thatn
1
n
2
4exchangep
1
withp
2
5exchanger
1
withr
2
6exchangen
1
withn
2
7ifn
1
==0//both empty?
8return
9elseq
1
D
b
.p
1
Cr
1
/=2
c
10q
2
DBINARY-SEARCH.T Œq
1
; T; p
2
;r
2
/
11q
3
Dp
3
C.q
1
p
1
/C.q
2
p
2
/
12AŒq
3
DTŒq
1

13spawnP-M
ERGE.T; p
1
;q
1
1; p
2
;q
2
1; A; p
3
/
14P-M
ERGE.T; q
1
C1; r
1
;q
2
;r
2
;A;q
3
C1/
15sync
The P-M
ERGEprocedure works as follows.  Lines 1–2 compute the lengthsn
1
andn
2
of  the  subarraysTŒp
1
::r
1
andTŒp
2
::r
2
,  respectively.   Lines  3–6  en-
force  the  assumption  thatn
1
n
2
.   Line  7  tests  for  the  base  case,  where  the
subarrayTŒp
1
::r
1
is empty (and hence so isTŒp
2
::r
2
), in which case we sim-
ply return.  Lines 9–15 implement the divide-and-conquer  strategy.  Line 9 com-
putes the midpoint ofTŒp
1
::r
1
, and line 10 finds the pointq
2
inTŒp
2
::r
2
such
that all elements inTŒp
2
::q
2
1are less thanTŒq
1
(which corresponds tox)
and  all the elements  inTŒq
2
::p
2
are at least  as large  asTŒq
1
.Line11com-

27.3    Multithreaded merge sort801
putes the indexq
3
of the element that divides the output subarrayAŒp
3
::r
3
into
AŒp
3
::q
3
1andAŒq
3
C1::r
3
, and then line 12 copiesTŒq
1
directly intoAŒq
3
.
Then, we recurse using nested parallelism. Line 13 spawns the first subproblem,
while line 14 calls the second subproblem in parallel. Thesyncstatement in line 15
ensures that the subproblems have completed before the procedure returns. (Since
every procedure implicitly executes asyncbefore returning, we could have omitted
thesyncstatement  in  line  15,  but  including  it  is  good  coding  practice.)   There
is some cleverness  in the coding  to ensure that when the subarrayTŒp
2
::r
2
is
empty, the code operates correctly. The way it works is that on each recursive call,
a median element ofTŒp
1
::r
1
is placed into the output subarray, untilTŒp
1
::r
1

itself finally becomes empty, triggering the base case.
Analysis of multithreaded merging
We first derive a recurrence  for the spanPM
1
.n/of  P-MERGE,  where the two
subarrays contain a total ofnDn
1
Cn
2
elements. Because the spawn in line 13 and
the call in line 14 operate logically in parallel, we need examine only the costlier of
the two calls. The key is to understand that in the worst case, the maximum number
of elements in either of the recursive calls can be at most3n=4, which we see as
follows.  Because lines 3–6 ensure thatn
2
n
1
, it follows thatn
2
D2n
2
=2
.n
1
Cn
2
/=2Dn=2.   In  the  worst  case,  one  of  the  two recursive  calls  merges
b
n
1
=2
c
elements ofTŒp
1
::r
1
with alln
2
elements ofTŒp
2
::r
2
, and hence the
number of elements involved in the call is
b
n
1
=2
c
Cn
2
n
1
=2Cn
2
=2Cn
2
=2
D.n
1
Cn
2
/=2Cn
2
=2
n=2Cn=4
D3n=4 :
Adding in the‚.lgn/cost of the call to B
INARY-SEARCHin line 10, we obtain
the following recurrence for the worst-case span:
PM
1
.n/DPM
1
.3n=4/C‚.lgn/ :(27.8)
(For  the base  case,  the  span  is‚.1/,  since  lines  1–8  execute  in constant  time.)
This recurrence does not fall under any of the cases of the master theorem, but it
meets the condition of Exercise 4.6-2. Therefore, the solution to recurrence (27.8)
isPM
1
.n/D‚.lg
2
n/.
We now analyze the workPM
1
.n/of P-MERGEonnelements, which turns out
to be‚.n/. Since each of thenelements must be copied from arrayTto arrayA,
we havePM
1
.n/D.n/. Thus, it remains only to show thatPM
1
.n/DO.n/.
We shall first derive a recurrence for the worst-case work.  The binary search in
line 10 costs‚.lgn/in the worst case,  which dominates the other work outside

802Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
of the recursive calls.  For the recursive calls, observe that although the recursive
calls in lines 13 and 14 might merge different numbers of elements, together the
two recursive calls merge at mostnelements (actuallyn1elements, sinceTŒq
1

does not participate in either recursive call). Moreover, as we saw in analyzing the
span, a recursive call operates on at most3n=4elements.  We therefore obtain the
recurrence
PM
1
.n/DPM
1
. ̨ n/CPM
1
..1 ̨/n/CO.lgn/ ;(27.9)
where ̨lies in the range1=4 ̨3=4, and where we understand that the actual
value of ̨may vary for each level of recursion.
We prove that recurrence (27.9) has solutionPM
1
DO.n/via the substitution
method. Assume thatPM
1
.n/c
1
nc
2
lgnfor some positive constantsc
1
andc
2
.
Substituting gives us
PM
1
.n/.c
1
 ̨nc
2
lg. ̨ n//C.c
1
.1 ̨/nc
2
lg..1 ̨/n//C‚.lgn/
Dc
1
. ̨C.1 ̨//nc
2
.lg. ̨ n/Clg..1 ̨/n//C‚.lgn/
Dc
1
nc
2
.lg ̨ClgnClg.1 ̨/Clgn/C‚.lgn/
Dc
1
nc
2
lgn.c
2
.lgnClg. ̨.1 ̨///‚.lgn//
c
1
nc
2
lgn;
since we can choosec
2
large enough thatc
2
.lgnClg. ̨.1 ̨///dominates the
‚.lgn/term.   Furthermore,  we  can  choosec
1
large  enough  to  satisfy  the  base
conditions of the recurrence.  Since the workPM
1
.n/of P-MERGEis both.n/
andO.n/,wehavePM
1
.n/D‚.n/.
The parallelism of P-M
ERGEisPM
1
.n/=PM
1
.n/D‚.n=lg
2
n/.
Multithreaded merge sort
Now that we have a nicely parallelized multithreaded merging procedure, we can
incorporate it into a multithreaded merge sort. This version of merge sort is similar
to the M
ERGE-SORT
0
procedure we saw earlier, but unlike MERGE-SORT
0
, it takes
as an argument an output subarrayB, which will hold the sorted result.  In par-
ticular, the call P-M
ERGE-SORT.A;p;r;B;s/sorts the elements inAŒp : : r and
stores them inBŒs : :sCrp.

27.3    Multithreaded merge sort803
P-MERGE-SORT.A;p;r;B;s/
1nDrpC1
2ifn
==1
3BŒsDAŒp
4elseletTŒ1::nbeanewarray
5qD
b
.pCr/=2
c
6q
0
DqpC1
7spawnP-M
ERGE-SORT.A;p;q;T;1/
8P-M
ERGE-SORT.A; qC1; r; T; q
0
C1/
9sync
10P-M
ERGE.T;1;q
0
;q
0
C1; n; B; s/
After line 1 computes the numbernof elements in the input subarrayAŒp : : r ,
lines 2–3 handle the base case when the array has only1element.  Lines 4–6 set
up for the recursive spawn in line 7 and call in line 8, which operate in parallel. In
particular, line 4 allocates a temporary arrayTwithnelements to store the results
of the recursive merge sorting.  Line 5 calculates the indexqofAŒp : : r to divide
the elements into the two subarraysAŒp : : qandAŒqC1::rthat will be sorted
recursively, and line 6 goes on to compute the numberq
0
of elements in the first
subarrayAŒp : : q, which line 8 uses to determine the starting index inTof where
to store the sorted result ofAŒqC1::r.  At that point, the spawn and recursive
call are made, followed by thesyncin line 9, which forces the procedure to wait
until  the spawned  procedure  is done.   Finally,  line 10 calls  P-M
ERGEto merge
the sorted subarrays, now inTŒ1::q
0
andTŒq
0
C1::n, into the output subarray
BŒs::sCrp.
Analysis of multithreaded merge sort
We start by analyzing the workPMS
1
.n/of P-MERGE-SORT, which is consider-
ably easier than analyzing the work of P-M
ERGE. Indeed, the work is given by the
recurrence
PMS
1
.n/D2PMS
1
.n=2/CPM
1
.n/
D2PMS
1
.n=2/C‚.n/ :
This  recurrence  is  the  same  as  the  recurrence  (4.4)  for  ordinary  M
ERGE-SORT
from Section 2.3.1 and has solutionPMS
1
.n/D‚.nlgn/by case 2 of the master
theorem.
We now derive and analyze a recurrence for the worst-case spanPMS
1
.n/.Be-
cause the two recursive calls to P-M
ERGE-SORTon lines 7 and 8 operate logically
in parallel, we can ignore one of them, obtaining the recurrence

804Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
PMS
1
.n/DPMS
1
.n=2/CPM
1
.n/
DPMS
1
.n=2/C‚.lg
2
n/ :(27.10)
As for recurrence (27.8), the master theorem does not apply to recurrence (27.10),
but Exercise 4.6-2 does. The solution isPMS
1
.n/D‚.lg
3
n/, and so the span of
P-M
ERGE-SORTis‚.lg
3
n/.
Parallel merging gives P-M
ERGE-SORTa significant parallelism advantage over
M
ERGE-SORT
0
.  Recall that the parallelism of MERGE-SORT
0
, which calls the se-
rial M
ERGEprocedure, is only‚.lgn/.ForP-MERGE-SORT, the parallelism is
PMS
1
.n/=PMS
1
.n/D‚.nlgn/=‚.lg
3
n/
D‚.n=lg
2
n/ ;
which is much better both in theory and in practice.   A good implementation  in
practice would sacrifice some parallelism by coarsening the base case in order to
reduce the constants hidden by the asymptotic notation.  The straightforward way
to coarsen the base case is to switch to an ordinary serial sort, perhaps quicksort,
when the size of the array is sufficiently small.
Exercises
27.3-1
Explain how to coarsen the base case of P-M
ERGE.
27.3-2
Instead of finding a median element in the larger subarray, as P-M
ERGEdoes, con-
sider a variant  that finds a median element of all the elements in the two sorted
subarrays  using  the  result  of  Exercise  9.3-8.   Give  pseudocode  for  an  efficient
multithreaded  merging procedure that uses this median-finding  procedure.  Ana-
lyze your algorithm.
27.3-3
Give an efficient multithreaded algorithm for partitioning an array around a pivot,
as is done by the P
ARTITIONprocedure on page 171. You need not partition the ar-
ray in place. Make your algorithm as parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.
(Hint:You may need an auxiliary array and may need to make more than one pass
over the input elements.)
27.3-4
Give a multithreaded version of R
ECURSIVE-FFT on page 911. Make your imple-
mentation as parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.

Problems for Chapter 27805
27.3-5?
Give a multithreaded version of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTon page 216.  Make your
implementation as parallel  as possible.  Analyze your algorithm.  (Hint:Use the
partitioning algorithm from Exercise 27.3-3.)
27.3-6?
Show how to multithread S
ELECTfrom Section 9.3. Make your implementation as
parallel as possible. Analyze your algorithm.
Problems
27-1  Implementing parallel loops using nested parallelism
Consider the following multithreaded algorithm for performing pairwise addition
onn-element arraysAŒ1 : : nandBŒ1::n, storing the sums inCŒ1::n:
S
UM-ARRAYS.A;B;C/
1parallel foriD1toA:length
2CŒiDAŒi CBŒi
a.Rewrite  the  parallel  loop  in  S
UM-ARRAYSusing  nested  parallelism  (spawn
andsync) in the manner of M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP.  Analyze the parallelism
of your implementation.
Consider  the following alternative  implementation  of the parallel  loop,  which
contains a valuegrain-sizeto be specified:
S
UM-ARRAYS
0
.A;B;C/
1nDA:length
2grain-sizeD‹//to be determined
3rD
d
n=grain-size
e
4forkD0tor1
5spawnA
DD-SUBARRAY.A;B;C;kgrain-sizeC1;
min..kC1/grain-size; n//
6sync
A
DD-SUBARRAY.A;B;C;i;j/
1forkDitoj
2CŒkDAŒkCBŒk

806Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
b.Suppose that we setgrain-sizeD1. What is the parallelism of this implemen-
tation?
c.Give a formula  for the span of  S
UM-ARRAYS
0
in terms ofnandgrain-size.
Derive the best value forgrain-sizeto maximize parallelism.
27-2  Saving temporary space in matrix multiplication
The  P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEprocedure  has  the  disadvantage  that  it
must allocate a temporary matrixTof sizen	n, which can adversely affect the
constants hidden by the‚-notation. The P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVEpro-
cedure does have high parallelism, however.  For example, ignoring the constants
in the‚-notation, the parallelism for multiplying1000	1000matrices comes to
approximately1000
3
=10
2
D10
7
, since lg100010.  Most parallel computers
have far fewer than10million processors.
a.Describe a recursive multithreaded algorithm that eliminates the need for the
temporary matrixTat the cost of increasing  the span to‚.n/.(Hint:Com-
puteCDCCABfollowing the general strategy of P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-
R
ECURSIVE, but initializeCin parallel and insert asyncin a judiciously cho-
sen location.)
b.Give and solve recurrences for the work and span of your implementation.
c.Analyze the parallelism of your implementation.  Ignoring the constants in the
‚-notation, estimate the parallelism on1000	1000matrices.  Compare with
the parallelism of P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE.
27-3  Multithreaded matrix algorithms
a.Parallelize the LU-D
ECOMPOSITIONprocedure on page 821 by giving pseu-
docode for a multithreaded version of this algorithm.  Make your implementa-
tion as parallel as possible, and analyze its work, span, and parallelism.
b.Do the same for LUP-D
ECOMPOSITIONon page 824.
c.Do the same for LUP-S
OLVEon page 817.
d.Do the same for a multithreaded  algorithm based on equation (28.13) for in-
verting a symmetric positive-definite matrix.

Problems for Chapter 27807
27-4  Multithreading reductions and prefix computations
A ̋-reductionof an arrayxŒ1 : : n,where ̋is an associative operator, is the value
yDxŒ1 ̋xŒ2 ̋ ̋xŒn :
The following procedure computes the ̋-reduction of a subarrayxŒi ::jserially.
R
EDUCE.x;i;j/
1yDxŒi
2forkDiC1toj
3yDy ̋xŒk
4returny
a.Use  nested  parallelism  to  implement  a  multithreaded  algorithm  P-R
EDUCE,
which performs the same function with‚.n/work and‚.lgn/span.  Analyze
your algorithm.
A  related  problem  is  that  of  computing  a ̋-prefix computation,  sometimes
called a ̋-scan, on an arrayxŒ1 : : n,where ̋is once again an associative op-
erator. The ̋-scan produces the arrayyŒ1::ngiven by
yŒ1DxŒ1 ;
yŒ2DxŒ1 ̋xŒ2 ;
yŒ3DxŒ1 ̋xŒ2 ̋xŒ3 ;
:
:
:
yŒnDxŒ1 ̋xŒ2 ̋xŒ3 ̋ ̋xŒn ;
that is, all prefixes of the arrayx“summed” using the ̋operator.  The following
serial procedure S
CANperforms a ̋-prefix computation:
S
CAN.x/
1nDx:length
2letyŒ1::nbe a new array
3yŒ1DxŒ1
4foriD2ton
5yŒiDyŒi1 ̋xŒi
6returny
Unfortunately, multithreading S
CANis not straightforward. For example, changing
theforloop to aparallel forloop would create races, since each iteration of the
loop body depends on the previous iteration.  The following procedure P-S
CAN-1
performs the ̋-prefix computation in parallel, albeit inefficiently:

808Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
P-SCAN-1.x/
1nDx:length
2letyŒ1::nbeanewarray
3P-S
CAN-1-AUX.x;y;1;n/
4returny
P-S
CAN-1-AUX.x;y;i;j/
1parallel forlDitoj
2yŒlDP-R
EDUCE.x;1;l/
b.Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of P-S
CAN-1.
By using nested parallelism, we can obtain a more efficient ̋-prefix computa-
tion:
P-S
CAN-2.x/
1nDx:length
2letyŒ1::nbeanewarray
3P-S
CAN-2-AUX.x;y;1;n/
4returny
P-S
CAN-2-AUX.x;y;i;j/
1ifi
==j
2yŒiDxŒi
3elsekD
b
.iCj/=2
c
4spawnP-S
CAN-2-AUX.x;y;i;k/
5P-S
CAN-2-AUX.x;y;kC1; j /
6sync
7parallel forlDkC1toj
8yŒlDyŒk ̋yŒl
c.Argue that P-S
CAN-2 is correct, and analyze its work, span, and parallelism.
We can improve on both P-S
CAN-1 and P-SCAN-2 by performing the ̋-prefix
computation in two distinct passes over the data.  On the first pass, we gather the
terms for various contiguous subarrays ofxinto a temporary arrayt, and on the
second  pass we use the terms intto compute the final resulty.  The following
pseudocode implements this strategy, but certain expressions have been omitted:

Problems for Chapter 27809
P-SCAN-3.x/
1nDx:length
2letyŒ1::nandtŒ1:: nbe new arrays
3yŒ1DxŒ1
4ifn>1
5P-S
CAN-UP.x;t;2;n/
6P-S
CAN-DOWN.xŒ1; x; t; y; 2; n/
7returny
P-S
CAN-UP.x;t;i;j/
1ifi
==j
2returnxŒi
3else
4kD
b
.iCj/=2
c
5tŒkDspawnP-S
CAN-UP.x;t;i;k/
6rightDP-S
CAN-UP.x;t;kC1; j /
7sync
8return
//fill in the blank
P-S
CAN-DOWN.;x;t;y;i;j/
1ifi
==j
2yŒiD ̋xŒi
3else
4kD
b
.iCj/=2
c
5spawnP-S
CAN-DOWN.;x;t;y;i;k///fill in the blank
6P-S
CAN-DOWN.;x;t;y;kC1; j ///fill in the blank
7sync
d.Fill in the three missing expressions in line 8 of P-S
CAN-UPand lines 5 and 6
of P-S
CAN-DOWN.  Argue that with expressions you supplied,  P-SCAN-3 is
correct. (Hint:Prove that the valuepassed to P-S
CAN-DOWN.;x;t;y;i;j/
satisfiesDxŒ1 ̋xŒ2 ̋ ̋xŒi1.)
e.Analyze the work, span, and parallelism of P-S
CAN-3.
27-5  Multithreading a simple stencil calculation
Computational science is replete with algorithms that require the entries of an array
to be filled in with values that depend on the values of certain already computed
neighboring  entries,  along  with other  information  that  does not change  over the
course  of  the computation.   The pattern  of  neighboring  entries  does  not  change
during the computation and is called astencil. For example, Section 15.4 presents

810Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
a stencil algorithm to compute a longest common subsequence, where the value in
entrycŒi; j depends only on the values incŒi1; j ,cŒi; j1,andcŒi1; j1,
as well as the elementsx
i
andy
j
within the two sequences given as inputs.  The
input sequences are fixed, but the algorithm fills in the two-dimensional arraycso
that it computes entrycŒi; j after computing all three entriescŒi1; j ,cŒi; j1,
andcŒi1; j1.
In  this  problem,  we  examine  how  to  use  nested  parallelism  to  multithread  a
simple stencil calculation  on ann	narrayAin which, of the values inA,the
value placed into entryAŒi; j depends only on values inAŒi
0
;j
0
,wherei
0
i
andj
0
j(and of course,i
0
¤iorj
0
¤j).  In other words, the value in an
entry depends only on values in entries that are above it and/or to its left, along
with static information outside of the array.  Furthermore, we assume throughout
this problem that once we have filled in the entries upon whichAŒi; j depends, we
can fill inAŒi; j in‚.1/time (as in the LCS-L
ENGTHprocedure of Section 15.4).
We can partition then	narrayAinto fourn=2	n=2subarrays as follows:
AD

A
11
A
12
A
21
A
22

:(27.11)
Observe now that we can fill in subarrayA
11
recursively, since it does not depend
on the entries of the other three subarrays. OnceA
11
is complete, we can continue
to fill inA
12
andA
21
recursively in parallel,  because although they both depend
onA
11
, they do not depend on each other. Finally, we can fill inA
22
recursively.
a.Give  multithreaded  pseudocode  that  performs  this  simple  stencil  calculation
using a divide-and-conquer algorithm S
IMPLE-STENCILbased on the decom-
position (27.11) and the discussion above. (Don’t worry about the details of the
base case, which depends on the specific stencil.)  Give and solve recurrences
for the work and span of this algorithm in terms ofn. What is the parallelism?
b.Modify your solution to part (a) to divide ann	narray into ninen=3	n=3
subarrays, again recursing with as much parallelism as possible.  Analyze this
algorithm.  How much more or less parallelism does this algorithm have com-
pared with the algorithm from part (a)?
c.Generalize  your  solutions  to parts (a) and (b) as follows.   Choose an integer
b2.Divideann	narray intob
2
subarrays, each of sizen=b	n=b, recursing
with as much parallelism as possible.  In terms ofnandb, what are the work,
span, and parallelism of your algorithm?  Argue that, using this approach, the
parallelism must beo.n/for any choice ofb2.(Hint:For this last argument,
show that  the exponent  ofnin the parallelism  is strictly  less than1for  any
choice ofb2.)

Notes for Chapter 27811
d.Give pseudocode  for a multithreaded  algorithm  for this simple stencil  calcu-
lation that achieves‚.n=lgn/parallelism.  Argue using notions of work and
span that the problem, in fact, has‚.n/inherent parallelism.  As it turns out,
the divide-and-conquer nature of our multithreaded pseudocode does not let us
achieve this maximal parallelism.
27-6  Randomized multithreaded algorithms
Just as with ordinary serial algorithms, we sometimes want to implement random-
ized multithreaded  algorithms.   This problem  explores  how to adapt  the various
performance measures in order to handle the expected behavior of such algorithms.
It also asks you to design and analyze a multithreaded algorithm for randomized
quicksort.
a.Explain how to modify the work law (27.2), span law (27.3), and greedy sched-
uler bound (27.4) to work with expectations whenT
P
,T
1
,andT
1
are all ran-
dom variables.
b.Consider a randomized multithreaded algorithm for which1% of the time we
haveT
1
D10
4
andT
10;000
D1,butfor99%ofthetimewehaveT
1
D
T
10;000
D10
9
.  Argue that thespeedupof a randomized multithreaded  algo-
rithm should be defined as EŒT
1
=EŒT
P
, rather than EŒT
1
=T
P
.
c.Argue that theparallelismof a randomized multithreaded algorithm should be
defined as the ratio EŒT
1
=EŒT
1
.
d.Multithread the R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTalgorithm on page 179 by using
nested parallelism.  (Do not parallelize R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION.)  Give the
pseudocode for your P-R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORTalgorithm.
e.Analyze  your  multithreaded  algorithm  for  randomized  quicksort.   (Hint:Re-
view the analysis of R
ANDOMIZED-SELECTon page 216.)
Chapter notes
Parallel computers, models for parallel computers, and algorithmic models for par-
allel programming have been around in various forms for years.  Prior editions of
this book included material on sorting networks and the PRAM (Parallel Random-
Access Machine) model.  The data-parallel model [48, 168] is another popular al-
gorithmic programming model, which features operations on vectors and matrices
as primitives.

812Chapter 27Multithreaded Algorithms
Graham [149] and Brent [55] showed that there exist schedulers achieving the
bound  of  Theorem  27.1.   Eager,  Zahorjan,  and  Lazowska  [98]  showed  that  any
greedy scheduler achieves this bound and proposed the methodology of using work
and span (although not by those names) to analyze parallel algorithms.  Blelloch
[47] developed an algorithmic programming model based on work and span (which
he called the “depth” of the computation) for data-parallel programming. Blumofe
and  Leiserson  [52]  gave  a  distributed  scheduling  algorithm  for  dynamic  multi-
threading  based  on randomized  “work-stealing”  and showed that  it achieves  the
bound EŒT
P
T
1
=PCO.T
1
/. Arora, Blumofe, and Plaxton [19] and Blelloch,
Gibbons, and Matias [49] also provided provably good algorithms for scheduling
dynamic multithreaded computations.
The multithreaded pseudocode and programming model were heavily influenced
by the Cilk [51, 118] project at MIT and the Cilk++ [71] extensions to C++ dis-
tributed by Cilk Arts, Inc.  Many of the multithreaded algorithms in this chapter
appeared in unpublished lecture notes by C. E. Leiserson and H. Prokop and have
been implemented in Cilk or Cilk++.  The multithreaded merge-sorting algorithm
was inspired by an algorithm of Akl [12].
The notion of sequential consistency is due to Lamport [223].

28Matrix Operations
Because operations on matrices lie at the heart of scientific computing, efficient al-
gorithms for working with matrices have many practical applications. This chapter
focuses on how to multiply matrices and solve sets of simultaneous linear equa-
tions. Appendix D reviews the basics of matrices.
Section 28.1 shows how to solve a set of linear equations using LUP decomposi-
tions.  Then, Section 28.2 explores the close relationship between multiplying and
inverting matrices. Finally, Section 28.3 discusses the important class of symmetric
positive-definite matrices and shows how we can use them to find a least-squares
solution to an overdetermined set of linear equations.
One important  issue that arises  in practice  isnumerical stability.   Due to the
limited precision of floating-point  representations  in actual computers,  round-off
errors in numerical computations may become amplified over the course of a com-
putation, leading to incorrect results; we call such computationsnumerically un-
stable.  Although we shall briefly consider numerical stability on occasion, we do
not focus on it in this chapter.  We refer you to the excellent book by Golub and
Van Loan [144] for a thorough discussion of stability issues.
28.1  Solving systems of linear equations
Numerous applications  need to solve sets of  simultaneous  linear  equations.   We
can formulate a linear system as a matrix equation in which each matrix or vector
element belongs to a field, typically the real numbersR. This section discusses how
to solve a system of linear equations using a method called LUP decomposition.
We start with a set of linear equations innunknownsx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
:

814Chapter 28Matrix Operations
a
11
x
1
Ca
12
x
2
CCa
1n
x
n
Db
1
;
a
21
x
1
Ca
22
x
2
CCa
2n
x
n
Db
2
;
:
:
:
a
n1
x
1
Ca
n2
x
2
CCa
nn
x
n
Db
n
:
(28.1)
Asolutionto the equations (28.1) is a set of values forx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
that satisfy
all of the equations simultaneously. In this section, we treat only the case in which
there are exactlynequations innunknowns.
We can conveniently rewrite equations (28.1) as the matrix-vector equation
 ̇
a
11
a
12
a
1n
a
21
a
22
a
2n
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
a
n1
a
n2
a
nn
 ̇
x
1
x
2
:
:
:
x
n

D
 ̇
b
1
b
2
:
:
:
b
n

or, equivalently, lettingAD.a
ij
/,xD.x
i
/,andbD.b
i
/,as
AxDb:(28.2)
IfAis nonsingular, it possesses an inverseA
1
,and
xDA
1
b(28.3)
is the solution vector. We can prove thatxis the unique solution to equation (28.2)
as follows. If there are two solutions,xandx
0
,thenAxDAx
0
Dband, lettingI
denote an identity matrix,
xDIx
D.A
1
A/x
DA
1
.Ax/
DA
1
.Ax
0
/
D.A
1
A/x
0
Dx
0
:
In this section, we shall be concerned predominantly with the case in whichA
is nonsingular  or,  equivalently  (by  Theorem  D.1),  the  rank ofAis equal  to the
numbernof unknowns. There are other possibilities, however, which merit a brief
discussion. If the number of equations is less than the numbernof unknowns—or,
more generally,  if  the rank ofAis less  thann—then the system  isunderdeter-
mined.   An underdetermined  system  typically  has  infinitely  many  solutions,  al-
though  it  may  have  no  solutions  at  all  if  the  equations  are  inconsistent.   If  the
number of equations exceeds the numbernof unknowns, the system isoverdeter-
mined, and there may not exist any solutions. Section 28.3 addresses the important

28.1Solving systems of linear equations815
problem of finding good approximate solutions to overdetermined systems of linear
equations.
Let us return to our problem of solving the systemAxDbofnequations inn
unknowns.   We could  computeA
1
and then,  using  equation  (28.3),  multiplyb
byA
1
,  yieldingxDA
1
b.  This approach  suffers in practice  from numerical
instability.   Fortunately,  another approach—LUP  decomposition—is  numerically
stable and has the further advantage of being faster in practice.
Overview of LUP decomposition
The idea behind LUP decomposition is to find threen	nmatricesL,U,andP
such that
PADLU ;(28.4)
where

Lis a unit lower-triangular matrix,

Uis an upper-triangular matrix, and

Pis a permutation matrix.
We call matricesL,U,andPsatisfying equation (28.4) anLUP decomposition
of the matrixA.  We shall show that every nonsingular matrixApossesses such a
decomposition.
Computing an LUP decomposition for the matrixAhas the advantage that we
can more easily solve linear systems when they are triangular,  as is the case for
both matricesLandU.  Once we have found an LUP decomposition  forA,we
can solve equation (28.2),AxDb, by solving only triangular linear systems, as
follows.  Multiplying both sides ofAxDbbyPyields the equivalent equation
PAxDPb, which, by Exercise D.1-4, amounts to permuting the equations (28.1).
Using our decomposition (28.4), we obtain
LUxDPb :
We can now solve this equation by solving two triangular linear systems.  Let us
defineyDUx,wherexis the desired solution vector.  First, we solve the lower-
triangular system
LyDPb(28.5)
for the unknown vectoryby a method called “forward substitution.” Having solved
fory, we then solve the upper-triangular system
UxDy(28.6)

816Chapter 28Matrix Operations
for the unknownxby a method called “back substitution.”  Because the permu-
tation  matrixPis  invertible  (Exercise  D.2-3),  multiplying  both  sides  of  equa-
tion (28.4) byP
1
givesP
1
PADP
1
LU,sothat
ADP
1
LU :(28.7)
Hence, the vectorxis our solution toAxDb:
AxDP
1
LUx(by equation (28.7))
DP
1
Ly(by equation (28.6))
DP
1
Pb(by equation (28.5))
Db:
Our next step is to show how forward and back substitution work and then attack
the problem of computing the LUP decomposition itself.
Forward and back substitution
Forward substitutioncan solve the lower-triangular system (28.5) in‚.n
2
/time,
givenL,P,andb.  For convenience, we represent the permutationPcompactly
by an arrayŒ1::n.ForiD1;2;:::;n, the entryŒiindicates thatP
i;Œi
D1
andP
ij
D0forj¤Œi.  Thus,PAhasa
Œi;j
in rowiand columnj,andPb
hasb
Œi
as itsith element.  SinceLis unit lower-triangular, we can rewrite equa-
tion (28.5) as
y
1
Db
Œ1
;
l
21
y
1
Cy
2
Db
Œ2
;
l
31
y
1
Cl
32
y
2
Cy
3
Db
Œ3
;
:
:
:
l
n1
y
1
Cl
n2
y
2
Cl
n3
y
3
CCy
n
Db
Œn
:
The  first  equation  tells  us  thaty
1
Db
Œ1
.   Knowing  the  value  ofy
1
,  we  can
substitute it into the second equation, yielding
y
2
Db
Œ2
l
21
y
1
:
Now, we can substitute bothy
1
andy
2
into the third equation, obtaining
y
3
Db
Œ3
.l
31
y
1
Cl
32
y
2
/:
In general, we substitutey
1
;y
2
;:::;y
i1
“forward” into theith equation to solve
fory
i
:

28.1Solving systems of linear equations817
y
i
Db
Œi

i1
X
jD1
l
ij
y
j
:
Having solved fory,wesolveforxin equation (28.6) usingback substitution,
which is similar to forward substitution.  Here, we solve thenth equation first and
work backward to the first equation.  Like forward substitution,  this process runs
in‚.n
2
/time. SinceUis upper-triangular, we can rewrite the system (28.6) as
u
11
x
1
Cu
12
x
2
CCu
1;n2
x
n2
Cu
1;n1
x
n1
Cu
1n
x
n
Dy
1
;
u
22
x
2
CCu
2;n2
x
n2
Cu
2;n1
x
n1
Cu
2n
x
n
Dy
2
;
:
:
:
u
n2;n2
x
n2
Cu
n2;n1
x
n1
Cu
n2;n
x
n
Dy
n2
;
u
n1;n1
x
n1
Cu
n1;n
x
n
Dy
n1
;
u
n;n
x
n
Dy
n
:
Thus, we can solve forx
n
;x
n1
;:::;x
1
successively as follows:
x
n
Dy
n
=u
n;n
;
x
n1
D.y
n1
u
n1;n
x
n
/=u
n1;n1
;
x
n2
D.y
n2
.u
n2;n1
x
n1
Cu
n2;n
x
n
//=u
n2;n2
;
:
:
:
or, in general,
x
i
D
 
y
i

n
X
jDiC1
u
ij
x
j
!
=u
ii
:
GivenP,L,U,andb, the procedure LUP-S
OLVEsolves forxby combining
forward and back substitution.  The pseudocode assumes that the dimensionnap-
pears in the attributeL:rowsand that the permutation matrixPis represented by
the array.
LUP-S
OLVE.L;U;;b/
1nDL:rows
2letxbe a new vector of lengthn
3foriD1ton
4y
i
Db
Œi

P
i1
jD1
l
ij
y
j
5foriDndownto1
6x
i
D

y
i

P
n
jDiC1
u
ij
x
j

=u
ii
7returnx

818Chapter 28Matrix Operations
Procedure LUP-SOLVEsolves foryusing forward substitution in lines 3–4, and
then it solves forxusing backward substitution in lines 5–6. Since the summation
within each of theforloops includes an implicit loop, the running time is‚.n
2
/.
As an example of these methods, consider the system of linear equations defined
by

120
344
563

xD

3
7
8

;
where
AD

120
344
563

;
bD

3
7
8

;
and we wish to solve for the unknownx. The LUP decomposition is
LD

100
0:21   0
0:6   0:5   1

;
UD

56   3
00:80:6
002:5

;
PD

001
100
010

:
(You might want to verify thatPADLU.)  Using forward substitution, we solve
LyDPbfory:

100
0:21   0
0:6   0:5   1

y
1
y
2
y
3

D

8
3
7

;
obtaining
yD

8
1:4
1:5

by computing firsty
1
,theny
2
, and finallyy
3
.  Using back substitution, we solve
UxDyforx:

28.1Solving systems of linear equations819

56   3
00:80:6
002:5

x
1
x
2
x
3

D

8
1:4
1:5

;
thereby obtaining the desired answer
xD

1:4
2:2
0:6

by computing firstx
3
,thenx
2
, and finallyx
1
.
Computing an LU decomposition
We have now shown that if we can create an LUP decomposition for a nonsingular
matrixA,  then forward  and  back  substitution  can  solve the  systemAxDbof
linear equations. Now we show how to efficiently compute an LUP decomposition
forA.  We start with the case in whichAis ann	nnonsingular matrix andPis
absent (or, equivalently,PDI
n
).  In this case, we factorADLU.  We call the
two matricesLandUanLU decompositionofA.
We use a process known asGaussian eliminationto create an LU decomposi-
tion. We start by subtracting multiples of the first equation from the other equations
in order to remove the first variable from those equations.  Then, we subtract mul-
tiples of the second equation from the third and subsequent equations so that now
the first and second variables are removed from them.  We continue this process
until the system that remains has an upper-triangular  form—in fact, it is the ma-
trixU.  The matrixLis made up of the row multipliers that cause variables to be
eliminated.
Our algorithm to implement this strategy is recursive.  We wish to construct an
LU decomposition for ann	nnonsingular matrixA.IfnD1, then we are done,
since we can chooseLDI
1
andUDA.Forn>1, we breakAinto four parts:
AD
 ̇
a
11
a
12
a
1n
a
21
a
22
a
2n
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
a
n1
a
n2
a
nn

D

a
11
w
T
A
0

;
whereis  a  column.n1/-vector,w
T
isarow.n1/-vector,  andA
0
is  an
.n1/	.n1/matrix.   Then,  using  matrix  algebra  (verify  the  equations  by

820Chapter 28Matrix Operations
simply multiplying through), we can factorAas
AD

a
11
w
T
A
0

D

10
=a
11
I
n1

a
11
w
T
0A
0
w
T
=a
11

:(28.8)
The0s  in  the  first  and  second  matrices  of  equation  (28.8)  are  row  and  col-
umn.n1/-vectors,  respectively.The  termw
T
=a
11
,formedbytakingthe
outer  product  ofandwand  dividing  each  element  of  the  result  bya
11
,isan
.n1/	.n1/matrix, which conforms in size to the matrixA
0
from which it is
subtracted. The resulting.n1/	.n1/matrix
A
0
w
T
=a
11
(28.9)
is called theSchur complementofAwith respect toa
11
.
We claim that ifAis nonsingular,  then the Schur complement is nonsingular,
too.  Why?  Suppose that the Schur complement,  which is.n1/	.n1/,is
singular.  Then by Theorem D.1, it has row rank strictly less thann1.  Because
the bottomn1entries in the first column of the matrix

a
11
w
T
0A
0
w
T
=a
11

are all0,  the bottomn1rows of this matrix must have row rank strictly  less
thann1.  The row rank of the entire matrix,  therefore,  is strictly less thann.
Applying Exercise D.2-8 to equation (28.8),Ahas rank strictly less thann,and
from Theorem D.1 we derive the contradiction thatAis singular.
Because the Schur complement is nonsingular, we can now recursively find an
LU decomposition for it. Let us say that
A
0
w
T
=a
11
DL
0
U
0
;
whereL
0
is unit lower-triangular  andU
0
is upper-triangular.  Then, using matrix
algebra, we have
AD

10
=a
11
I
n1

a
11
w
T
0A
0
w
T
=a
11

D

10
=a
11
I
n1

a
11
w
T
0L
0
U
0

D

10
=a
11
L
0

a
11
w
T
0U
0

DLU ;
thereby  providing  our  LU  decomposition.   (Note  that  becauseL
0
is  unit  lower-
triangular, so isL, and becauseU
0
is upper-triangular, so isU.)

28.1Solving systems of linear equations821
Of course, ifa
11
D0, this method doesn’t work, because it divides by0.Italso
doesn’t work if the upper leftmost entry of the Schur complementA
0
w
T
=a
11
is0,  since  we  divide  by  it  in  the  next  step  of  the  recursion.   The  elements  by
which we divide during LU decomposition are calledpivots, and they occupy the
diagonal elements of the matrixU. The reason we include a permutation matrixP
during LUP decomposition is that it allows us to avoid dividing by0.Whenweuse
permutations to avoid division by0(or by small numbers, which would contribute
to numerical instability), we arepivoting.
An important class of matrices for which LU decomposition always works cor-
rectly is the class of symmetric positive-definite matrices.  Such matrices require
no pivoting,  and thus we can employ the recursive strategy outlined above with-
out fear of dividing by0.  We shall prove this result, as well as several others, in
Section 28.3.
Our code for LU decomposition of a matrixAfollows the recursive strategy, ex-
cept that an iteration loop replaces the recursion. (This transformation is a standard
optimization for a “tail-recursive” procedure—one whose last operation is a recur-
sive call to itself.   See Problem 7-4.)  It assumes that the attributeA:rowsgives
the dimension ofA.  We initialize the matrixUwith0s below the diagonal  and
matrixLwith1s on its diagonal and0s above the diagonal.
LU-D
ECOMPOSITION.A/
1nDA:rows
2letLandUbe newn	nmatrices
3initializeUwith0s below the diagonal
4initializeLwith1s on the diagonal and0s above the diagonal
5forkD1ton
6u
kk
Da
kk
7foriDkC1ton
8l
ik
Da
ik
=u
kk
//l
ik
holds
i
9u
ki
Da
ki
//u
ki
holdsw
T
i
10foriDkC1ton
11forjDkC1ton
12a
ij
Da
ij
l
ik
u
kj
13returnLandU
The outerforloop beginning in line 5 iterates once for each recursive step. Within
this loop, line 6 determines the pivot to beu
kk
Da
kk
.Theforloop in lines 7–9
(which does not  execute  whenkDn),  uses theandw
T
vectors  to updateL
andU. Line 8 determines the elements of thevector, storing
i
inl
ik
, and line 9
computes the elements of thew
T
vector,  storingw
T
i
inu
ki
.  Finally,  lines 10–12
compute the elements of the Schur complement and store them back into the ma-

822Chapter 28Matrix Operations
2315
613519
2 191023
4 101131
(a)
315
3424
116918
24921
(b)
2315
324
1412
21717
(c)
2315
3424
142
2173
(d)
(e)
2
4
1

2315
613 5 19
2191023
4101131
 ̆
D

1000
3100
1410
2171
 ̆
2315
0424
0012
0003
 ̆
ALU
Figure 28.1The operation of LU-DECOMPOSITION.(a)The matrixA.(b)The elementa
11
D2
in the black circle is the pivot, the shaded column is=a
11
, and the shaded row isw
T
. The elements
ofUcomputed thus far are above the horizontal line, and the elements ofLare to the left of the
vertical line.  The Schur complement matrixA
0
w
T
=a
11
occupies the lower right.(c)We  now
operate on the Schur complement matrix produced from part (b). The elementa
22
D4in the black
circle is the pivot, and the shaded column and row are=a
22
andw
T
(in the partitioning of the Schur
complement), respectively. Lines divide the matrix into the elements ofUcomputed so far (above),
the elements ofLcomputed so far (left), and the new Schur complement (lower right).(d)After the
next step, the matrixAis factored. (The element3in the new Schur complement becomes part ofU
when the recursion terminates.)(e)The factorizationADLU.
trixA. (We don’t need to divide bya
kk
in line 12 because we already did so when
we computedl
ik
in line 8.) Because line 12 is triply nested, LU-DECOMPOSITION
runs in time‚.n
3
/.
Figure 28.1 illustrates the operation of LU-D
ECOMPOSITION.  It shows a stan-
dard optimization of the procedure in which we store the significant elements ofL
andUin place in the matrixA.  That is, we can set up a correspondence between
each elementa
ij
and eitherl
ij
(ifi>j)oru
ij
(ifij) and update the ma-
trixAso that it holds bothLandUwhen the procedure  terminates.   To obtain
the pseudocode for this optimization from the above pseudocode, just replace each
reference tolorubya; you can easily verify that this transformation preserves
correctness.
Computing an LUP decomposition
Generally, in solving a system of linear equationsAxDb, we must pivot on off-
diagonal elements ofAto avoid dividing by0.  Dividing by0would, of course,
be disastrous.  But we also want to avoid dividing by a small value—even ifAis

28.1Solving systems of linear equations823
nonsingular—because numerical instabilities can result.  We therefore try to pivot
on a large value.
The mathematics  behind LUP decomposition  is similar  to that  of LU decom-
position.  Recall that we are given ann	nnonsingular  matrixA, and we wish
to find a permutation matrixP, a unit lower-triangular  matrixL, and an upper-
triangular matrixUsuch thatPADLU. Before we partition the matrixA,aswe
did for LU decomposition, we move a nonzero element, saya
k1
, from somewhere
in the first column to the.1; 1/position of the matrix.  For numerical stability, we
choosea
k1
as the element in the first column with the greatest absolute value. (The
first column cannot contain only0s, for thenAwould be singular, because its de-
terminant would be0, by Theorems D.4 and D.5.)  In order to preserve the set of
equations, we exchange row1with rowk, which is equivalent to multiplyingAby
a permutation matrixQon the left (Exercise D.1-4). Thus, we can writeQAas
QAD

a
k1
w
T
A
0

;
whereD.a
21
;a
31
;:::;a
n1
/
T
,  except  thata
11
replacesa
k1
;w
T
D.a
k2
;a
k3
;
:::;a
kn
/;andA
0
is an.n1/	.n1/matrix. Sincea
k1
¤0, we can now perform
much the same linear algebra as for LU decomposition, but now guaranteeing that
we do not divide by0:
QAD

a
k1
w
T
A
0

D

10
=a
k1
I
n1

a
k1
w
T
0A
0
w
T
=a
k1

:
As we saw for LU decomposition, ifAis nonsingular, then the Schur comple-
mentA
0
w
T
=a
k1
is  nonsingular,  too.   Therefore,  we  can  recursively  find  an
LUP decomposition for it, with unit lower-triangular  matrixL
0
, upper-triangular
matrixU
0
, and permutation matrixP
0
, such that
P
0
.A
0
w
T
=a
k1
/DL
0
U
0
:
Define
PD

10
0P
0

Q;
which is a permutation matrix, since it is the product of two permutation matrices
(Exercise D.1-4). We now have

824Chapter 28Matrix Operations
PAD

10
0P
0

QA
D

10
0P
0

10
=a
k1
I
n1

a
k1
w
T
0A
0
w
T
=a
k1

D

10
P
0
=a
k1
P
0

a
k1
w
T
0A
0
w
T
=a
k1

D

10
P
0
=a
k1
I
n1

a
k1
w
T
0P
0
.A
0
w
T
=a
k1
/

D

10
P
0
=a
k1
I
n1

a
k1
w
T
0L
0
U
0

D

10
P
0
=a
k1
L
0

a
k1
w
T
0U
0

DLU ;
yielding the LUP decomposition.  BecauseL
0
is unit lower-triangular, so isL,and
becauseU
0
is upper-triangular, so isU.
Notice that  in this derivation,  unlike  the one for LU decomposition,  we must
multiply both the column vector=a
k1
and the Schur complementA
0
w
T
=a
k1
by the permutation matrixP
0
. Here is the pseudocode for LUP decomposition:
LUP-D
ECOMPOSITION.A/
1nDA:rows
2letŒ1::nbe a new array
3foriD1ton
4ŒiDi
5forkD1ton
6pD0
7foriDkton
8if
j
a
ik
j
>p
9pD
j
a
ik
j
10k
0
Di
11ifp
==0
12error“singular matrix”
13exchangeŒkwithŒk
0

14foriD1ton
15exchangea
ki
witha
k
0
i
16foriDkC1ton
17a
ik
Da
ik
=a
kk
18forjDkC1ton
19a
ij
Da
ij
a
ik
a
kj

28.1Solving systems of linear equations825
Like  LU-DECOMPOSITION,  our  LUP-DECOMPOSITIONprocedure  replaces
the recursion with an iteration loop.  As an improvement over a direct implemen-
tation of the recursion, we dynamically maintain the permutation matrixPas an
array,whereŒiDjmeans that theith row ofPcontains a1in columnj.
We also implement the code to computeLandU“in place” in the matrixA. Thus,
when the procedure terminates,
a
ij
D
(
l
ij
ifi>j;
u
ij
ifij:
Figure 28.2 illustrates how LUP-D
ECOMPOSITIONfactors a matrix. Lines 3–4
initialize  the  arrayto  represent  the  identity  permutation.   The  outerforloop
beginning in line 5 implements the recursion.  Each time through the outer loop,
lines 6–10 determine the elementa
k
0
k
with largest absolute value of those in the
current first column (columnk)ofthe.nkC1/	.nkC1/matrix whose
LUP decomposition we are finding.  If all elements in the current first column are
zero, lines 11–12 report that the matrix is singular.  To pivot, we exchangeŒk
0

withŒkin  line  13  and  exchange  thekth  andk
0
th  rows  ofAin  lines  14–15,
thereby making the pivot elementa
kk
.  (The entire rows are swapped because in
the derivation of the method above, not only isA
0
w
T
=a
k1
multiplied byP
0
,but
so is=a
k1
.)  Finally, the Schur complement is computed by lines 16–19 in much
the same way as it is computed by lines 7–12 of LU-D
ECOMPOSITION, except that
here the operation is written to work in place.
Because of its triply nested loop structure,  LUP-D
ECOMPOSITIONhas a run-
ning time of‚.n
3
/,  which is the same as that  of  LU-DECOMPOSITION.   Thus,
pivoting costs us at most a constant factor in time.
Exercises
28.1-1
Solve the equation

100
410
651

x
1
x
2
x
3

D

3
14
7

by using forward substitution.
28.1-2
Find an LU decomposition of the matrix

456
867
12712

:

826Chapter 28Matrix Operations
2020.6
334–2
5542
–1–23.4–1
(a)
1
2
3
4
2020.6
334–2
5542
–1–23.4–1
(b)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4    –.2
0.601.6   –3.2
5542
–0.2    –14.2   –0.6
(c)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4   –0.2
0.601.6   –3.2
5542
–0.2    –14.2   –0.6
(d)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4   –0.2
0.601.6   –3.2
5542
–0.2   –14.2   –0.6
(e)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4   –0.2
0.601.6   –3.2
5542
–0.2   0.54–0.5
(f)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4   –0.2
0.601.6   –3.2
5542
–0.2   0.54–0.5
(g)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4   –0.2
0.601.6   –3.2
5542
–0.2   0.54–0.5
(h)
3
2
1
4
0.4–20.4   –0.2
0.600.4–3
5542
–0.2   0.54–0.5
(i)
3
2
1
4
(j)

0010
1000
0001
0100
 ̆
2020:6
3342
5542
123:41
 ̆
D

1000
0:4100
0:2   0:510
0:600:4   1
 ̆
55 4   2
020:40:2
00 40:5
00 03
 ̆
PALU
Figure 28.2The operation of LUP-DECOMPOSITION.(a)The input matrixAwith the identity
permutation of the rows on the left.  The first step of the algorithm determines that the element5
in the black circle in the third row is the pivot for the first column.(b)Rows1and3are swapped
and the permutation is updated.  The shaded column and row representandw
T
.(c)The vector
is replaced by=5, and the lower right of the matrix is updated with the Schur complement.  Lines
divide the matrix into three regions: elements ofU(above), elements ofL(left), and elements of the
Schur complement (lower right).(d)–(f)The second step.(g)–(i)The third step. No further changes
occur on the fourth (final) step.(j)The LUP decompositionPADLU.

28.2Inverting matrices827
28.1-3
Solve the equation

154
203
582

x
1
x
2
x
3

D

12
9
5

by using an LUP decomposition.
28.1-4
Describe the LUP decomposition of a diagonal matrix.
28.1-5
Describe the LUP decomposition of a permutation matrixA, and prove that it is
unique.
28.1-6
Show that for alln1, there exists a singularn	nmatrix that has an LU decom-
position.
28.1-7
In LU-D
ECOMPOSITION, is it necessary to perform the outermostforloop itera-
tion whenkDn? How about in LUP-D
ECOMPOSITION?
28.2  Inverting matrices
Although in practice we do not generally use matrix inverses to solve systems of
linear equations, preferring instead to use more numerically stable techniques such
as LUP decomposition,  sometimes we need to compute a matrix inverse.  In this
section,  we show  how  to  use  LUP decomposition  to  compute  a  matrix  inverse.
We also  prove that matrix multiplication  and computing  the inverse  of a matrix
are  equivalently  hard  problems,  in  that  (subject  to technical  conditions)  we can
use an algorithm for one to solve the other in the same asymptotic running time.
Thus, we can use Strassen’s algorithm (see Section 4.2) for matrix multiplication
to invert a matrix. Indeed, Strassen’s original paper was motivated by the problem
of showing that a set of a linear equations could be solved more quickly than by
the usual method.

828Chapter 28Matrix Operations
Computing a matrix inverse from an LUP decomposition
Suppose that we have an LUP decomposition of a matrixAin the form of three
matricesL,U,andPsuch thatPADLU.  Using LUP-S
OLVE,  we can solve
an equation of the formAxDbin time‚.n
2
/.  Since the LUP decomposition
depends onAbut notb, we can run LUP-S
OLVEon a second set of equations of
the formAxDb
0
in additional time‚.n
2
/.  In general,  once we have the LUP
decomposition  ofA,  we can  solve,  in time‚.k n
2
/,kversions  of  the  equation
AxDbthat differ only inb.
We can think of the equation
AXDI
n
;(28.10)
which defines the matrixX, the inverse ofA, as a set ofndistinct equations of the
formAxDb. To be precise, letX
i
denote theith column ofX, and recall that the
unit vectore
i
is theith column ofI
n
. We can then solve equation (28.10) forXby
using the LUP decomposition forAto solve each equation
AX
i
De
i
separately forX
i
. Once we have the LUP decomposition, we can compute each of
thencolumnsX
i
in time‚.n
2
/, and so we can computeXfrom the LUP decom-
position ofAin time‚.n
3
/. Since we can determine the LUP decomposition ofA
in time‚.n
3
/, we can compute the inverseA
1
of a matrixAin time‚.n
3
/.
Matrix multiplication and matrix inversion
We  now  show  that  the  theoretical  speedups  obtained  for  matrix  multiplication
translate to speedups for matrix inversion.  In fact, we prove something stronger:
matrix  inversion  is  equivalent  to  matrix  multiplication,  in  the  following  sense.
IfM.n/denotes  the time to multiply  twon	nmatrices,  then  we can  invert  a
nonsingularn	nmatrix in timeO.M.n//.  Moreover,  ifI.n/denotes the time
to invert a nonsingularn	nmatrix, then we can multiply twon	nmatrices in
timeO.I.n//. We prove these results as two separate theorems.
Theorem 28.1 (Multiplication is no harder than inversion)
If  we can  invert  ann	nmatrix  in  timeI.n/,whereI.n/D.n
2
/andI.n/
satisfies the regularity conditionI.3n/DO.I.n//, then we can multiply twon	n
matrices in timeO.I.n//.
ProofLetAandBben	nmatrices whose matrix productCwe wish to com-
pute. We define the3n	3nmatrixDby

28.2Inverting matrices829
DD

I
n
A0
0I
n
B
00I
n

:
The inverse ofDis
D
1
D

I
n
AAB
0I
n
B
00 I
n

;
and thus we can compute the productABby taking the upper rightn	nsubmatrix
ofD
1
.
We can construct matrixDin‚.n
2
/time, which isO.I.n//because we assume
thatI.n/D.n
2
/, and we can invertDinO.I.3n//DO.I.n//time,  by the
regularity condition onI.n/. We thus haveM.n/DO.I.n//.
Note thatI.n/satisfies the regularity condition wheneverI.n/D‚.n
c
lg
d
n/
for any constantsc>0andd0.
The proof  that  matrix inversion  is no  harder  than  matrix  multiplication  relies
on some properties of symmetric positive-definite matrices that we will prove in
Section 28.3.
Theorem 28.2 (Inversion is no harder than multiplication)
Suppose we can multiply twon	nreal matrices in timeM.n/,whereM.n/D
.n
2
/andM.n/satisfies the two regularity conditionsM.nCk/DO.M.n//for
anykin the range0knandM.n=2/cM.n/for some constantc<1=2.
Then we can compute  the inverse  of any real  nonsingularn	nmatrix in time
O.M.n//.
ProofWe prove the theorem here for real matrices.  Exercise 28.2-6 asks you to
generalize the proof for matrices whose entries are complex numbers.
We can assume thatnis an exact power of2,sincewehave

A0
0I
k

1
D

A
1
0
0I
k

for anyk>0.  Thus, by choosingksuch thatnCkis a power of 2, we enlarge
the matrix to a size that is the next power of 2 and obtain the desired answerA
1
from the answer to the enlarged problem.  The first regularity condition onM.n/
ensures that this enlargement does not cause the running time to increase by more
than a constant factor.
For the moment, let us assume that then	nmatrixAis symmetric and positive-
definite. We partition each ofAand its inverseA
1
into fourn=2	n=2submatri-
ces:

830Chapter 28Matrix Operations
AD

BC
T
CD

andA
1
D

RT
UV

:(28.11)
Then, if we let
SDDCB
1
C
T
(28.12)
be the Schur complement ofAwith respect toB(we shall see more about this form
of Schur complement in Section 28.3), we have
A
1
D

RT
UV

D

B
1
CB
1
C
T
S
1
CB
1
B
1
C
T
S
1
S
1
CB
1
S
1

;(28.13)
sinceAA
1
DI
n
, as you can verify by performing the matrix multiplication.  Be-
causeAis symmetric and positive-definite, Lemmas 28.4 and 28.5 in Section 28.3
imply thatBandSare both symmetric and positive-definite.  By Lemma 28.3 in
Section 28.3,  therefore,  the inversesB
1
andS
1
exist,  and by Exercise D.2-6,
B
1
andS
1
are symmetric, so that.B
1
/
T
DB
1
and.S
1
/
T
DS
1
.There-
fore, we can compute the submatricesR,T,U,andVofA
1
as follows, where
all matrices mentioned aren=2	n=2:
1.   Form the submatricesB,C,C
T
,andDofA.
2.   Recursively compute the inverseB
1
ofB.
3.   Compute the matrix productWDCB
1
, and then compute its transposeW
T
,
which equalsB
1
C
T
(by Exercise D.1-2 and.B
1
/
T
DB
1
).
4.   Compute  the  matrix  productXDWC
T
,  which  equalsCB
1
C
T
,andthen
compute the matrixSDDXDDCB
1
C
T
.
5.   Recursively compute the inverseS
1
ofS, and setVtoS
1
.
6.   Compute  the  matrix  productYDS
1
W,  which  equalsS
1
CB
1
,and
then compute its transposeY
T
, which equalsB
1
C
T
S
1
(by Exercise D.1-2,
.B
1
/
T
DB
1
,and.S
1
/
T
DS
1
). SetTtoY
T
andUtoY.
7.   Compute the matrix productZDW
T
Y, which equalsB
1
C
T
S
1
CB
1
,and
setRtoB
1
CZ.
Thus, we can invert ann	nsymmetric positive-definite matrix by inverting two
n=2	n=2matrices in steps 2 and 5; performing four multiplications ofn=2	n=2
matrices  in steps 3,  4,  6,  and 7;  plus an additional  cost  ofO.n
2
/for extracting
submatrices  fromA,  inserting  submatrices  intoA
1
,  and  performing  a constant
number of additions, subtractions, and transposes onn=2	n=2matrices.  We get
the recurrence
I.n/2I.n=2/C4M.n=2/CO.n
2
/
D2I.n=2/C‚.M.n//
DO.M.n// :

28.2Inverting matrices831
The  second  line  holds  because  the  second  regularity  condition  in  the  statement
of  the  theorem  implies  that4M.n=2/  <  2M.n/and  because  we  assume  that
M.n/D.n
2
/.   The  third  line  follows  because  the  second  regularity  condition
allows us to apply case 3 of the master theorem (Theorem 4.1).
It remains to prove that we can obtain the same asymptotic running time for ma-
trix multiplication as for matrix inversion whenAis invertible but not symmetric
and positive-definite.  The basic idea is that for any nonsingular matrixA,thema-
trixA
T
Ais symmetric (by Exercise D.1-2) and positive-definite (by Theorem D.6).
The trick, then, is to reduce the problem of invertingAto the problem of invert-
ingA
T
A.
The reduction is based on the observation that whenAis ann	nnonsingular
matrix, we have
A
1
D.A
T
A/
1
A
T
;
since..A
T
A/
1
A
T
/AD.A
T
A/
1
.A
T
A/DI
n
and  a  matrix  inverse  is  unique.
Therefore, we can computeA
1
by first multiplyingA
T
byAto obtainA
T
A,then
inverting the symmetric positive-definite matrixA
T
Ausing the above divide-and-
conquer algorithm, and finally multiplying the result byA
T
.  Each of these three
steps takesO.M.n//time, and thus we can invert any nonsingular matrix with real
entries inO.M.n//time.
The proof of Theorem 28.2 suggests a means of solving the equationAxDb
by using  LU decomposition  without  pivoting,  so long  asAis  nonsingular.   We
multiply both sides of the equation byA
T
, yielding.A
T
A/xDA
T
b.  This trans-
formation doesn’t affect the solutionx,sinceA
T
is invertible, and so we can fac-
tor the symmetric positive-definite matrixA
T
Aby computing an LU decomposi-
tion. We then use forward and back substitution to solve forxwith the right-hand
sideA
T
b.  Although this method is theoretically correct, in practice the procedure
LUP-D
ECOMPOSITIONworks much better.   LUP decomposition  requires  fewer
arithmetic operations by a constant  factor,  and it has somewhat better numerical
properties.
Exercises
28.2-1
LetM.n/be the time to multiply twon	nmatrices, and letS.n/denote the time
required  to square  ann	nmatrix.   Show that  multiplying  and squaring  matri-
ces have essentially  the same difficulty:  anM.n/-time matrix-multiplication  al-
gorithm implies anO.M.n//-time squaring algorithm, and anS.n/-time squaring
algorithm implies anO.S.n//-time matrix-multiplication algorithm.

832Chapter 28Matrix Operations
28.2-2
LetM.n/be the time to multiply twon	nmatrices, and letL.n/be the time to
compute the LUP decomposition of ann	nmatrix. Show that multiplying matri-
ces and computing LUP decompositions of matrices have essentially the same dif-
ficulty:  anM.n/-time matrix-multiplication  algorithm implies anO.M.n//-time
LUP-decomposition  algorithm,  and anL.n/-time LUP-decomposition  algorithm
implies anO.L.n//-time matrix-multiplication algorithm.
28.2-3
LetM.n/be the time to multiply  twon	nmatrices,  and letD.n/denote  the
time  required  to  find  the  determinant  of  ann	nmatrix.   Show  that  multiply-
ing matrices and computing the determinant have essentially the same difficulty:
anM.n/-time matrix-multiplication algorithm implies anO.M.n//-time determi-
nant algorithm, and aD.n/-time determinant algorithm implies anO.D.n//-time
matrix-multiplication algorithm.
28.2-4
LetM.n/be the time to multiply twon	nboolean matrices, and letT .n/be the
time to find the transitive closure of ann	nboolean matrix.  (See Section 25.2.)
Show  that  anM.n/-time  boolean  matrix-multiplication  algorithm  implies  an
O.M.n/lgn/-time transitive-closure algorithm, and aT .n/-time transitive-closure
algorithm implies anO.T .n//-time boolean matrix-multiplication algorithm.
28.2-5
Does the matrix-inversion  algorithm  based  on Theorem  28.2 work when matrix
elements are drawn from the field of integers modulo 2? Explain.
28.2-6?
Generalize the matrix-inversion algorithm of Theorem 28.2 to handle matrices of
complex numbers, and prove that your generalization works correctly.  (Hint:In-
stead of the transpose ofA,usetheconjugate transposeA

, which you obtain from
the transpose ofAby replacing every entry with its complex conjugate. Instead of
symmetric matrices, considerHermitianmatrices, which are matricesAsuch that
ADA

.)
28.3  Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares approximation
Symmetric positive-definite matrices have many interesting and desirable proper-
ties.  For example, they are nonsingular,  and we can perform LU decomposition
on them  without  having  to worry about  dividing  by0.   In this section,  we shall

28.3Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares approximation833
prove  several  other  important  properties  of symmetric  positive-definite  matrices
and show an interesting application to curve fitting by a least-squares approxima-
tion.
The first property we prove is perhaps the most basic.
Lemma 28.3
Any positive-definite matrix is nonsingular.
ProofSuppose that a matrixAis singular. Then by Corollary D.3, there exists a
nonzero vectorxsuch thatAxD0. Hence,x
T
AxD0,andAcannot be positive-
definite.
The  proof  that  we  can  perform  LU  decomposition  on  a  symmetric  positive-
definite matrixAwithout dividing by0is more involved.  We begin by proving
properties about certain submatrices ofA.Definethekthleading submatrixofA
to be the matrixA
k
consisting  of the intersection  of the firstkrows and firstk
columns ofA.
Lemma 28.4
IfAis a symmetric positive-definite matrix, then every leading submatrix ofAis
symmetric and positive-definite.
ProofThat each leading submatrixA
k
is symmetric is obvious. To prove thatA
k
is positive-definite, we assume that it is not and derive a contradiction. IfA
k
is not
positive-definite, then there exists ak-vectorx
k
¤0such thatx
T
k
A
k
x
k
0.LetA
ben	n,and
AD

A
k
B
T
BC

(28.14)
for submatricesB(which is.nk/	k)andC(which is.nk/	.nk/). Define
then-vectorxD.
x
T
k
0
/
T
,wherenk0s followx
k
.Thenwehave
x
T
AxD.
x
T
k
0
/

A
k
B
T
BC

x
k
0

D.
x
T
k
0
/

A
k
x
k
Bx
k

Dx
T
k
A
k
x
k
0;
which contradictsAbeing positive-definite.

834Chapter 28Matrix Operations
We now turn to some essential properties of the Schur complement.  LetAbe
a  symmetric  positive-definite  matrix,  and  letA
k
bealeadingk	ksubmatrix
ofA.  PartitionAonce again according to equation (28.14).  We generalize equa-
tion (28.9) to define theSchur complementSofAwith respect toA
k
as
SDCBA
1
k
B
T
:(28.15)
(By Lemma 28.4,A
k
is symmetric and positive-definite; therefore,A
1
k
exists by
Lemma 28.3, andSis well defined.)  Note that our earlier definition (28.9) of the
Schur complement is consistent with equation (28.15), by lettingkD1.
The next lemma shows that the Schur-complement matrices of symmetric posi-
tive-definite matrices are themselves symmetric and positive-definite. We used this
result in Theorem 28.2, and we need its corollary to prove the correctness of LU
decomposition for symmetric positive-definite matrices.
Lemma 28.5 (Schur complement lemma)
IfAis a symmetric positive-definite matrix andA
k
is a leadingk	ksubmatrix
ofA,  then  the  Schur  complementSofAwith  respect  toA
k
is  symmetric  and
positive-definite.
ProofBecauseAis symmetric, so is the submatrixC.  By Exercise D.2-6, the
productBA
1
k
B
T
is symmetric, and by Exercise D.1-1,Sis symmetric.
It remains to show thatSis positive-definite. Consider the partition ofAgiven in
equation (28.14). For any nonzero vectorx,wehavex
T
Ax > 0by the assumption
thatAis positive-definite.  Let us breakxinto two subvectorsyand ́compatible
withA
k
andC, respectively. BecauseA
1
k
exists, we have
x
T
AxD.
y
T
 ́
T
/

A
k
B
T
BC

y
 ́

D.
y
T
 ́
T
/

A
k
yCB
T
 ́
ByCC ́

Dy
T
A
k
yCy
T
B
T
 ́C ́
T
ByC ́
T
C ́
D.yCA
1
k
B
T
 ́/
T
A
k
.yCA
1
k
B
T
 ́/C ́
T
.CBA
1
k
B
T
/ ́ ;(28.16)
by matrix magic.  (Verify by multiplying through.)  This last equation amounts to
“completing the square” of the quadratic form. (See Exercise 28.3-2.)
Sincex
T
Ax  > 0holds for any nonzerox, let us pick any nonzero ́and then
chooseyDA
1
k
B
T
 ́, which causes the first term in equation (28.16) to vanish,
leaving
 ́
T
.CBA
1
k
B
T
/ ́D ́
T
S ́
as  the  value  of  the  expression.    For  any ́¤0,  we  therefore  have ́
T
S ́D
x
T
Ax > 0, and thusSis positive-definite.

28.3Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares approximation835
Corollary 28.6
LU decomposition of a symmetric positive-definite matrix never causes a division
by0.
ProofLetAbe a symmetric positive-definite matrix.  We shall prove something
stronger than the statement of the corollary: every pivot is strictly positive. The first
pivot isa
11
.Lete
1
be the first unit vector, from which we obtaina
11
De
T
1
Ae
1
>0.
Since  the  first  step  of  LU decomposition  produces  the  Schur  complement  ofA
with respect toA
1
D.a
11
/, Lemma 28.5 implies by induction that all pivots are
positive.
Least-squares approximation
One important application of symmetric positive-definite matrices arises in fitting
curves to given sets of data points. Suppose that we are given a set ofmdata points
.x
1
;y
1
/; .x
2
;y
2
/;:::;.x
m
;y
m
/;
where we know that they
i
are subject to measurement errors.  We would like to
determine a functionF.x/such that the approximation errors

i
DF.x
i
/y
i
(28.17)
are small foriD1;2;:::;m. The form of the functionFdepends on the problem
at hand. Here, we assume that it has the form of a linearly weighted sum,
F.x/D
n
X
jD1
c
j
f
j
.x/ ;
where the number of summandsnand the specificbasis functionsf
j
are chosen
based on knowledge of the problem at hand.  A common choice isf
j
.x/Dx
j1
,
which means that
F.x/Dc
1
Cc
2
xCc
3
x
2
CCc
n
x
n1
is a polynomial of degreen1inx. Thus, givenmdata points.x
1
;y
1
/; .x
2
;y
2
/;
:::;.x
m
;y
m
/, we wish to calculatencoefficientsc
1
;c
2
;:::;c
n
that minimize the
approximation errors
1
;
2
;:::;
m
.
By choosingnDm, we can calculate eachy
i
exactlyin equation (28.17). Such
a high-degreeF“fits the noise” as well as the data, however, and generally gives
poor results when used to predictyfor previously unseen values ofx.Itisusu-
ally better to choosensignificantly smaller thanmand hope that by choosing the
coefficientsc
j
well, we can obtain a functionFthat finds the significant patterns
in the data points without paying undue attention to the noise.  Some theoretical

836Chapter 28Matrix Operations
principles exist for choosingn, but they are beyond the scope of this text.  In any
case, once we choose a value ofnthat is less thanm, we end up with an overde-
termined set of equations whose solution we wish to approximate.  We now show
how to do so.
Let
AD
 ̇
f
1
.x
1
/f
2
.x
1
/   :::   f
n
.x
1
/
f
1
.x
2
/f
2
.x
2
/   :::   f
n
.x
2
/
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
f
1
.x
m
/f
2
.x
m
/   :::   f
n
.x
m
/

denote  the  matrix  of  values  of  the  basis  functions  at  the  given  points;  that  is,
a
ij
Df
j
.x
i
/.LetcD.c
k
/denote the desiredn-vector of coefficients. Then,
AcD
 ̇
f
1
.x
1
/f
2
.x
1
/   :::   f
n
.x
1
/
f
1
.x
2
/f
2
.x
2
/   :::   f
n
.x
2
/
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
f
1
.x
m
/f
2
.x
m
/   :::   f
n
.x
m
/
 ̇
c
1
c
2
:
:
:
c
n

D
 ̇
F.x
1
/
F.x
2
/
:
:
:
F.x
m
/

is them-vector of “predicted values” fory. Thus,
DAcy
is them-vector ofapproximation errors.
To minimize approximation errors, we choose to minimize the norm of the error
vector, which gives us aleast-squares solution,since
k

k
D
 
m
X
iD1

2
i
!
1=2
:
Because
k

k
2
D
k
Acy
k
2
D
m
X
iD1
 
n
X
jD1
a
ij
c
j
y
i
!
2
;
we  can  minimize
k

k
by  differentiating
k

k
2
with  respect  to  eachc
k
and  then
setting the result to0:

28.3Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares approximation837
d
k

k
2
dc
k
D
m
X
iD1
2
 
n
X
jD1
a
ij
c
j
y
i
!
a
ik
D0:(28.18)
Thenequations  (28.18)  forkD1;2;:::;nare equivalent  to the single matrix
equation
.Acy/
T
AD0
or, equivalently (using Exercise D.1-2), to
A
T
.Acy/D0;
which implies
A
T
AcDA
T
y:(28.19)
In statistics,  this  is called  thenormal equation.   The  matrixA
T
Ais  symmetric
by  Exercise  D.1-2,  and  ifAhas  full  column  rank,  then  by  Theorem  D.6,A
T
A
is  positive-definite  as  well.   Hence,.A
T
A/
1
exists,  and  the  solution  to  equa-
tion (28.19) is
cD

.A
T
A/
1
A
T

y
DA
C
y;(28.20)
where the matrixA
C
D..A
T
A/
1
A
T
/is thepseudoinverseof the matrixA.The
pseudoinverse  naturally  generalizes  the notion of a matrix inverse to the case in
whichAis not square.  (Compare equation (28.20) as the approximate solution to
AcDywith the solutionA
1
bas the exact solution toAxDb.)
As an example of producing a least-squares fit, suppose that we have five data
points
.x
1
;y
1
/D.1; 2/ ;
.x
2
;y
2
/D.1; 1/ ;
.x
3
;y
3
/D.2; 1/ ;
.x
4
;y
4
/D.3; 0/ ;
.x
5
;y
5
/D.5; 3/ ;
shown as black dots in Figure 28.3.  We wish to fit these points with a quadratic
polynomial
F.x/Dc
1
Cc
2
xCc
3
x
2
:
We start with the matrix of basis-function values

838Chapter 28Matrix Operations
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
0.0
12 3450–1–2
x
y
F(x) = 1.2 – 0.757x + 0.214x
2
Figure 28.3The  least-squares  fit  of  a  quadratic  polynomial  to  the  set  of  five  data  points
f
.1; 2/; .1; 1/; .2; 1/; .3; 0/; .5; 3/
g
.  The black dots are the data points, and the white dots are their
estimated values predicted by the polynomialF.x/D1:20:757xC0:214x
2
, the quadratic poly-
nomial that minimizes the sum of the squared errors.  Each shaded line shows the error for one data
point.
AD

1x
1
x
2
1
1x
2
x
2
2
1x
3
x
2
3
1x
4
x
2
4
1x
5
x
2
5

D

111
111
124
139
1525

;
whose pseudoinverse is
A
C
D

0:5000:3000:2000:1000:100
0:3880:0930:1900:1930:088
0:0600:0360:0480:0360:060

:
MultiplyingybyA
C
, we obtain the coefficient vector
cD

1:200
0:757
0:214

;
which corresponds to the quadratic polynomial

28.3Symmetric positive-definite matrices and least-squares approximation839
F.x/D1:2000:757xC0:214x
2
as the closest-fitting quadratic to the given data, in a least-squares sense.
As a practical  matter,  we solve the normal equation (28.19)  by multiplyingy
byA
T
and  then  finding  an  LU  decomposition  ofA
T
A.IfAhas  full  rank,  the
matrixA
T
Ais guaranteed to be nonsingular, because it is symmetric and positive-
definite. (See Exercise D.1-2 and Theorem D.6.)
Exercises
28.3-1
Prove that every diagonal element of a symmetric positive-definite matrix is posi-
tive.
28.3-2
LetAD

ab
bc

be a2	2symmetric positive-definite matrix.  Prove that its
determinantacb
2
is positive by “completing the square” in a manner similar to
that used in the proof of Lemma 28.5.
28.3-3
Prove that the maximum element in a symmetric positive-definite  matrix lies on
the diagonal.
28.3-4
Prove  that  the  determinant  of  each  leading  submatrix  of  a  symmetric  positive-
definite matrix is positive.
28.3-5
LetA
k
denote thekth leading submatrix of a symmetric positive-definite matrixA.
Prove that det.A
k
/=det.A
k1
/is thekth pivot during LU decomposition,  where,
by convention, det.A
0
/D1.
28.3-6
Find the function of the form
F.x/Dc
1
Cc
2
xlgxCc
3
e
x
that is the best least-squares fit to the data points
.1; 1/; .2; 1/; .3; 3/; .4; 8/ :

840Chapter 28Matrix Operations
28.3-7
Show that the pseudoinverseA
C
satisfies the following four equations:
AA
C
ADA;
A
C
AA
C
DA
C
;
.AA
C
/
T
DAA
C
;
.A
C
A/
T
DA
C
A:
Problems
28-1  Tridiagonal systems of linear equations
Consider the tridiagonal matrix
AD
ˇ
11000
12100
01210
00121
00012

:
a.Find an LU decomposition ofA.
b.Solve the equationAxD

11111

T
by using forward and back sub-
stitution.
c.Find the inverse ofA.
d.Show how, for anyn	nsymmetric positive-definite, tridiagonal matrixAand
anyn-vectorb, to solve the equationAxDbinO.n/time by performing an
LU decomposition. Argue that any method based on formingA
1
is asymptot-
ically more expensive in the worst case.
e.Show how, for anyn	nnonsingular, tridiagonal matrixAand anyn-vectorb,to
solve the equationAxDbinO.n/time by performing an LUP decomposition.
28-2  Splines
A  practical  method  for  interpolating  a  set  of  points  with  a  curve  is  to  usecu-
bic splines.   We are given a set
f
.x
i
;y
i
/WiD0; 1; : : : ; n
g
ofnC1point-value
pairs,  wherex
0
<x
1
<<x
n
.   We  wish  to  fit  a  piecewise-cubic  curve
(spline)f.x/to the points.  That is, the curvef.x/is made up ofncubic polyno-
mialsf
i
.x/Da
i
Cb
i
xCc
i
x
2
Cd
i
x
3
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n1, where ifxfalls in

Problems for Chapter 28841
the rangex
i
xx
iC1
, then the value of the curve is given byf.x/Df
i
.xx
i
/.
The pointsx
i
at which the cubic polynomials are “pasted” together are calledknots.
For simplicity, we shall assume thatx
i
DiforiD0; 1; : : : ; n.
To ensure continuity off.x/, we require that
f.x
i
/Df
i
.0/Dy
i
;
f.x
iC1
/Df
i
.1/Dy
iC1
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  To ensure thatf.x/is sufficiently smooth, we also insist
that the first derivative be continuous at each knot:
f
0
.x
iC1
/Df
0
i
.1/Df
0
iC1
.0/
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n2.
a.Suppose that foriD0; 1; : : : ; n, we are given not only the point-value pairs
f
.x
i
;y
i
/
g
but also the first derivativesD
i
Df
0
.x
i
/at each knot. Express each
coefficienta
i
,b
i
,c
i
,andd
i
in terms  of the  valuesy
i
,y
iC1
,D
i
,andD
iC1
.
(Remember thatx
i
Di.)   How quickly  can we compute the4ncoefficients
from the point-value pairs and first derivatives?
The question remains of how to choose the first derivatives off.x/at the knots.
One method is to require the second derivatives to be continuous at the knots:
f
00
.x
iC1
/Df
00
i
.1/Df
00
iC1
.0/
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n2.   At the  first and last  knots,  we assume thatf
00
.x
0
/D
f
00
0
.0/D0andf
00
.x
n
/Df
00
n1
.1/D0; these assumptions makef.x/anatural
cubic spline.
b.Use the continuity  constraints  on the second derivative to show that  foriD
1;2;:::;n1,
D
i1
C4D
i
CD
iC1
D3.y
iC1
y
i1
/:(28.21)
c.Show that
2D
0
CD
1
D3.y
1
y
0
/;(28.22)
D
n1
C2D
n
D3.y
n
y
n1
/:(28.23)
d.Rewrite  equations  (28.21)–(28.23)  as  a matrix  equation  involving  the  vector
DDhD
0
;D
1
;:::;D
n
iof unknowns.  What attributes does the matrix in your
equation have?
e.Argue that a natural cubic spline can interpolate a set ofnC1point-value pairs
inO.n/time (see Problem 28-1).

842Chapter 28Matrix Operations
f.Show how to determine a natural cubic spline that interpolates a set ofnC1
points.x
i
;y
i
/satisfyingx
0
<x
1
<<x
n
,evenwhenx
i
is not necessarily
equal toi.  What matrix equation  must your method solve,  and how quickly
does your algorithm run?
Chapter notes
Many excellent texts describe numerical and scientific computation in much greater
detail than we have room for here.  The following are especially readable:  George
and Liu [132], Golub and Van Loan [144], Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flan-
nery [283, 284], and Strang [323, 324].
Golub and Van Loan [144] discuss numerical stability.  They show why det.A/
is not necessarily a good indicator of the stability of a matrixA, proposing instead
to use
k
A
k
1
k
A
1
k
1
,where
k
A
k
1
Dmax
1in
P
n
jD1
j
a
ij
j
.  They also address
the question of how to compute this value without actually computingA
1
.
Gaussian elimination, upon which the LU and LUP decompositions are based,
was the first systematic method for solving linear systems of equations. It was also
one of the earliest numerical algorithms.  Although it was known earlier,  its dis-
covery is commonly attributed to C. F. Gauss (1777–1855).  In his famous paper
[325], Strassen showed that ann	nmatrix can be inverted inO.n
lg7
/time. Wino-
grad  [358] originally  proved  that  matrix multiplication  is no  harder  than  matrix
inversion, and the converse is due to Aho, Hopcroft, and Ullman [5].
Another important matrix decomposition is thesingular value decomposition,
orSVD.  The SVD factors anm	nmatrixAintoADQ
1
†Q
T
2
,where†is an
m	nmatrix with nonzero values only on the diagonal,Q
1
ism	mwith mutually
orthonormal columns, andQ
2
isn	n, also with mutually orthonormal columns.
Two vectors areorthonormalif their inner product is0and each vector has a norm
of1. The books by Strang [323, 324] and Golub and Van Loan [144] contain good
treatments of the SVD.
Strang [324] has an excellent presentation of symmetric positive-definite matri-
ces and of linear algebra in general.

29Linear Programming
Many problems  take the form  of maximizing  or minimizing  an objective,  given
limited resources  and competing  constraints.   If we can specify  the objective  as
a  linear  function  of  certain  variables,  and  if  we  can  specify  the  constraints  on
resources as equalities or inequalities  on those variables,  then we have alinear-
programming problem.   Linear programs arise in a variety of practical  applica-
tions. We begin by studying an application in electoral politics.
A political problem
Suppose that you are a politician trying to win an election.  Your district has three
different  types  of  areas—urban,  suburban,  and rural.   These areas  have,  respec-
tively, 100,000, 200,000, and 50,000 registered voters.  Although not all the reg-
istered voters actually go to the polls,  you decide that to govern effectively,  you
would like at least half the registered voters in each of the three regions to vote for
you. You are honorable and would never consider supporting policies in which you
do not believe.  You realize, however, that certain issues may be more effective in
winning votes in certain places.  Your primary issues are building more roads, gun
control,  farm subsidies,  and a gasoline tax dedicated  to improved public  transit.
According to your  campaign staff’s research,  you can estimate how many votes
you win or lose from each population segment by spending $1,000 on advertising
on each issue.  This information appears in the table of Figure 29.1.  In this table,
each entry indicates the number of thousands of either urban,  suburban,  or rural
voters who would be won over by spending $1,000 on advertising in support of a
particular issue.  Negative entries denote votes that would be lost.  Your task is to
figure out the minimum amount of money that you need to spend in order to win
50,000 urban votes, 100,000 suburban votes, and 25,000 rural votes.
You could,  by trial and error,  devise a strategy that wins the required number
of votes, but the strategy you come up with might not be the least expensive one.
For example, you could devote $20,000 of advertising to building roads, $0 to gun
control, $4,000 to farm subsidies, and $9,000 to a gasoline tax.  In this case, you

844Chapter 29Linear Programming
policy
urbansuburbanrural
build roads253
gun control
825
farm subsidies
0010
gasoline tax
1002
Figure 29.1The effects of policies on voters.  Each entry describes the number of thousands of
urban, suburban, or rural voters who could be won over by spending $1,000 on advertising support
of a policy on a particular issue. Negative entries denote votes that would be lost.
would win20.2/C0.8/C4.0/C9.10/D50thousand urban votes,20.5/C0.2/C
4.0/C9.0/D100thousand suburban votes, and20.3/C0.5/C4.10/C9.2/D
82thousand rural votes.  You would win the exact number of votes desired in the
urban and suburban areas and more than enough votes in the rural area.  (In fact,
in the rural area, you would receive more votes than there are voters.)  In order to
garner these votes, you would have paid for20C0C4C9D33thousand dollars
of advertising.
Naturally, you may wonder whether this strategy is the best possible.  That is,
could you achieve your goals while spending less on advertising?  Additional trial
and error might help you to answer this question, but wouldn’t you rather have a
systematic method for answering such questions? In order to develop one, we shall
formulate this question mathematically. We introduce4variables:

x
1
is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on building roads,

x
2
is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on gun control,

x
3
is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on farm subsidies,
and

x
4
is the number of thousands of dollars spent on advertising on a gasoline tax.
We can write the requirement that we win at least 50,000 urban votes as
2x
1
C8x
2
C0x
3
C10x
4
50 :(29.1)
Similarly,  we can write the requirements  that we win at least  100,000  suburban
votes and 25,000 rural votes as
5x
1
C2x
2
C0x
3
C0x
4
100(29.2)
and
3x
1
5x
2
C10x
3
2x
4
25 :(29.3)
Any setting of the variablesx
1
;x
2
;x
3
;x
4
that satisfies inequalities  (29.1)–(29.3)
yields a strategy that wins a sufficient number of each type of vote.  In order to

Chapter 29Linear Programming845
keep costs as small as possible, you would like to minimize the amount spent on
advertising. That is, you want to minimize the expression
x
1
Cx
2
Cx
3
Cx
4
:(29.4)
Although negative advertising often occurs in political campaigns, there is no such
thing as negative-cost advertising. Consequently, we require that
x
1
0; x
2
0;  x
3
0;andx
4
0:(29.5)
Combining  inequalities  (29.1)–(29.3)  and  (29.5)  with  the  objective  of  minimiz-
ing (29.4), we obtain what is known as a “linear program.” We format this problem
as
minimizex
1
Cx
2
Cx
3
Cx
4
(29.6)
subject to
2x
1
C8x
2
C0x
3
C10x
4
50(29.7)
5x
1
C2x
2
C0x
3
C0x
4
100(29.8)
3x
1
5x
2
C10x
3
2x
4
25(29.9)
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
;x
4
0:(29.10)
The solution of this linear program yields your optimal strategy.
General linear programs
In the general linear-programming problem, we wish to optimize a linear function
subject to a set of linear inequalities. Given a set of real numbersa
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
and
a set of variablesx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
,wedefinealinear functionfon those variables
by
f.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/Da
1
x
1
Ca
2
x
2
CCa
n
x
n
D
n
X
jD1
a
j
x
j
:
Ifbis a real number andfis a linear function, then the equation
f.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/Db
is alinear equalityand the inequalities
f.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/b
and
f.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/b

846Chapter 29Linear Programming
arelinear inequalities. We use the general termlinear constraintsto denote either
linear  equalities  or linear  inequalities.   In linear  programming,  we do not allow
strict  inequalities.   Formally,  alinear-programming problemis  the  problem  of
either minimizing or maximizing a linear function subject to a finite set of linear
constraints. If we are to minimize, then we call the linear program aminimization
linear program,  and  if  we  are  to  maximize,  then  we  call  the  linear  program  a
maximization linear program.
The  remainder  of  this  chapter  covers  how  to  formulate  and  solve  linear  pro-
grams. Although several polynomial-time algorithms for linear programming have
been developed, we will not study them in this chapter. Instead, we shall study the
simplex algorithm, which is the oldest linear-programming algorithm. The simplex
algorithm does not run in polynomial time in the worst case, but it is fairly efficient
and widely used in practice.
An overview of linear programming
In order to describe properties  of and algorithms  for linear programs,  we find it
convenient to express them in canonical forms.  We shall use two forms,standard
andslack,  in this chapter.  We will define them precisely in Section 29.1.  Infor-
mally, a linear program in standard form is the maximization of a linear function
subject to linearinequalities, whereas a linear program in slack form is the max-
imization of a linear function subject to linearequalities.  We shall typically use
standard form for expressing linear programs,  but we find it more convenient  to
use slack form when we describe the details of the simplex algorithm. For now, we
restrict our attention to maximizing a linear function onnvariables subject to a set
ofmlinear inequalities.
Let us first consider the following linear program with two variables:
maximizex
1
Cx
2
(29.11)
subject to
4x
1
x
2
8(29.12)
2x
1
Cx
2
10(29.13)
5x
1
2x
2
2(29.14)
x
1
;x
2
0:(29.15)
We  call  any  setting  of  the  variablesx
1
andx
2
that  satisfies  all  the  constraints
(29.12)–(29.15)  afeasible solutionto the linear  program.   If  we graph  the con-
straints in the.x
1
;x
2
/-Cartesian coordinate  system, as in Figure 29.2(a),  we see

Chapter 29Linear Programming847
4
x
1
 – 
x
2
≤
 8
2
x
1
 + 
x
2
≤
 10
x
2
x
1
x
2
≥ 0
x
1
≥
 0
5
x
1
 – 2
x
2
≥
 –2
(a)
x
2
x
1
(b)
x
1
 + 
x
2
 = 0
x
1
 + 
x
2
 = 4
x
1
 + 
x
2
 = 8
Figure 29.2  (a)The linear program given in (29.12)–(29.15).  Each constraint is represented by
a line and a direction.  The intersection of the constraints, which is the feasible region, is shaded.
(b)The dotted lines show, respectively, the points for which the objective value is0,4,and8.The
optimal solution to the linear program isx
1
D2andx
2
D6with objective value8.
that the set of feasible solutions (shaded in the figure) forms a convex region
1
in
the two-dimensional space. We call this convex region thefeasible regionand the
function we wish to maximize theobjective function. Conceptually, we could eval-
uate the objective functionx
1
Cx
2
at each point in the feasible region; we call the
value of the objective function at a particular point theobjective value.  We could
then identify a point that has the maximum objective value as an optimal solution.
For this example (and for most linear programs),  the feasible region contains an
infinite number of points, and so we need to determine an efficient way to find a
point that achieves the maximum objective value without explicitly evaluating the
objective function at every point in the feasible region.
In two dimensions, we can optimize via a graphical procedure. The set of points
for whichx
1
Cx
2
D ́,forany ́, is a line with a slope of1.Ifweplotx
1
Cx
2
D0,
we obtain  the line  with slope1through  the origin,  as in  Figure 29.2(b).   The
intersection of this line and the feasible region is the set of feasible solutions that
have an objective  value of0.   In this case,  that intersection  of the line  with the
feasible region is the single point.0; 0/. More generally, for any ́, the intersection
1
An intuitive definition of a convex region is that it fulfills the requirement that for any two points in
the region, all points on a line segment between them are also in the region.

848Chapter 29Linear Programming
of the linex
1
Cx
2
D ́and the feasible region is the set of feasible solutions that
have objective value ́. Figure 29.2(b) shows the linesx
1
Cx
2
D0,x
1
Cx
2
D4,
andx
1
Cx
2
D8.  Because the feasible region in Figure 29.2 is bounded,  there
must be some maximum value ́for which the intersection of the linex
1
Cx
2
D ́
and the feasible region is nonempty.  Any point at which this occurs is an optimal
solution to the linear program, which in this case is the pointx
1
D2andx
2
D6
with objective value8.
It is no accident that an optimal solution to the linear program occurs at a vertex
of the feasible region.  The maximum value of ́for which the linex
1
Cx
2
D ́
intersects the feasible region must be on the boundary of the feasible region, and
thus the intersection of this line with the boundary of the feasible region is either a
single vertex or a line segment.  If the intersection is a single vertex, then there is
just one optimal solution, and it is that vertex. If the intersection is a line segment,
every point on that line segment must have the same objective value; in particular,
both endpoints of the line segment are optimal solutions. Since each endpoint of a
line segment is a vertex, there is an optimal solution at a vertex in this case as well.
Although we cannot easily graph linear programs with more than two variables,
the same intuition holds.  If we have three variables,  then each constraint  corre-
sponds to a half-space in three-dimensional space.  The intersection of these half-
spaces forms the feasible region. The set of points for which the objective function
obtains a given value ́is now a plane (assuming no degenerate conditions).  If all
coefficients of the objective function are nonnegative, and if the origin is a feasible
solution to the linear program, then as we move this plane away from the origin, in
a direction normal to the objective function, we find points of increasing objective
value. (If the origin is not feasible or if some coefficients in the objective function
are negative, the intuitive picture becomes slightly more complicated.)  As in two
dimensions,  because the feasible region is convex,  the set of points that achieve
the  optimal  objective  value  must  include  a  vertex  of  the  feasible  region.   Simi-
larly, if we havenvariables, each constraint defines a half-space inn-dimensional
space. We call the feasible region formed by the intersection of these half-spaces a
simplex. The objective function is now a hyperplane and, because of convexity, an
optimal solution still occurs at a vertex of the simplex.
Thesimplex algorithmtakes as input a linear program and returns an optimal
solution.  It starts at some vertex of the simplex and performs a sequence of itera-
tions. In each iteration, it moves along an edge of the simplex from a current vertex
to a neighboring vertex whose objective value is no smaller than that of the current
vertex (and usually is larger.)  The simplex algorithm terminates when it reaches
a local  maximum,  which is a vertex from which all neighboring  vertices have a
smaller objective value.  Because the feasible region is convex and the objective
function is linear, this local optimum is actually a global optimum. In Section 29.4,

Chapter 29Linear Programming849
we shall use a concept called “duality” to show that the solution returned by the
simplex algorithm is indeed optimal.
Although the geometric view gives a good intuitive view of the operations of the
simplex algorithm, we shall not refer to it explicitly when developing the details
of the simplex algorithm in Section 29.3.  Instead, we take an algebraic view.  We
first write the given linear program in slack form, which is a set of linear equalities.
These linear equalities express some of the variables, called “basic variables,” in
terms of other variables,  called “nonbasic variables.”  We move from one vertex
to another  by making a basic variable  become  nonbasic  and making a nonbasic
variable become basic.  We call this operation a “pivot” and, viewed algebraically,
it is nothing more than rewriting the linear program in an equivalent slack form.
The two-variable  example described  above was particularly  simple.   We shall
need to address  several  more details  in this chapter.   These issues  include  iden-
tifying linear programs that have no solutions, linear programs that have no finite
optimal solution, and linear programs for which the origin is not a feasible solution.
Applications of linear programming
Linear programming has a large number of applications.  Any textbook on opera-
tions research is filled with examples of linear programming, and linear program-
ming has become a standard tool taught to students in most business schools.  The
election scenario is one typical example.  Two more examples of linear program-
ming are the following:

An airline wishes to schedule its flight crews.  The Federal Aviation Adminis-
tration imposes many constraints,  such as limiting the number of consecutive
hours that each crew member can work and insisting that a particular crew work
only on one model of aircraft during each month. The airline wants to schedule
crews on all of its flights using as few crew members as possible.

An oil company wants to decide where to drill for oil. Siting a drill at a particu-
lar location has an associated cost and, based on geological surveys, an expected
payoff of some number of barrels of oil. The company has a limited budget for
locating new drills and wants to maximize the amount of oil it expects to find,
given this budget.
With linear programs, we also model and solve graph and combinatorial prob-
lems,  such as those appearing  in this textbook.   We have already  seen a special
case of linear programming used to solve systems of difference constraints in Sec-
tion  24.4.   In  Section  29.2,  we  shall  study  how  to  formulate  several  graph  and
network-flow problems  as linear  programs.   In Section 35.4,  we shall use linear
programming as a tool to find an approximate solution to another graph problem.

850Chapter 29Linear Programming
Algorithms for linear programming
This chapter  studies  the simplex  algorithm.   This algorithm,  when implemented
carefully,  often  solves  general  linear  programs  quickly  in  practice.   With  some
carefully contrived inputs, however, the simplex algorithm can require exponential
time. The first polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming was theellipsoid
algorithm, which runs slowly in practice. A second class of polynomial-time algo-
rithms are known asinterior-point methods.  In contrast to the simplex algorithm,
which moves along the exterior of the feasible region and maintains a feasible solu-
tion that is a vertex of the simplex at each iteration, these algorithms move through
the interior of the feasible region.  The intermediate solutions, while feasible, are
not necessarily vertices of the simplex, but the final solution is a vertex.  For large
inputs, interior-point algorithms can run as fast as, and sometimes faster than, the
simplex algorithm.  The chapter notes point you to more information about these
algorithms.
If we add to a linear program the additional requirement that all variables take
on integer values, we have aninteger linear program.  Exercise 34.5-3 asks you
to  show  that  just  finding  a  feasible  solution  to  this  problem  is  NP-hard;  since
no polynomial-time algorithms are known for any NP-hard problems, there is no
known polynomial-time algorithm for integer linear programming. In contrast, we
can solve a general linear-programming problem in polynomial time.
In this chapter, if we have a linear program with variablesxD.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/
and wish to refer to a particular setting of the variables, we shall use the notation
NxD.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
n
/.
29.1  Standard and slack forms
This section  describes  two formats,  standard  form and slack form,  that are use-
ful  when  we  specify  and  work  with  linear  programs.   In  standard  form,  all  the
constraints  are  inequalities,  whereas  in slack  form,  all constraints  are  equalities
(except for those that require the variables to be nonnegative).
Standard form
Instandard form,wearegivennreal  numbersc
1
;c
2
;:::;c
n
;mreal  numbers
b
1
;b
2
;:::;b
m
;andmnreal numbersa
ij
foriD1;2;:::;mandjD1;2;:::;n.
We w ish to fi ndnreal numbersx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
that

29.1Standard and slack forms851
maximize
n
X
jD1
c
j
x
j
(29.16)
subject to
n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
b
i
foriD1;2;:::;m(29.17)
x
j
0forjD1;2;:::;n :(29.18)
Generalizing the terminology we introduced for the two-variable linear program,
we call  expression  (29.16)  theobjective functionand thenCminequalities  in
lines (29.17) and (29.18) theconstraints.Thenconstraints in line (29.18) are the
nonnegativity constraints. An arbitrary linear program need not have nonnegativ-
ity constraints, but standard form requires them.  Sometimes we find it convenient
to express a linear program in a more compact form. If we create anm	nmatrix
AD.a
ij
/,anm-vectorbD.b
i
/,ann-vectorcD.c
j
/,andann-vectorxD.x
j
/,
then we can rewrite the linear program defined in (29.16)–(29.18) as
maximizec
T
x(29.19)
subject to
Axb(29.20)
x0:(29.21)
In line (29.19),c
T
xis the inner product of two vectors.  In inequality (29.20),Ax
is a matrix-vector product, and in inequality (29.21),x0means that each entry
of the vectorxmust be nonnegative.  We see that we can specify a linear program
in standard form by a tuple.A;b;c/, and we shall adopt the convention thatA,b,
andcalways have the dimensions given above.
We now introduce terminology to describe solutions to linear programs. We used
some of this terminology in the earlier example of a two-variable linear program.
We call a setting of the variablesNxthat satisfies all the constraints afeasible solu-
tion, whereas a setting of the variablesNxthat fails to satisfy at least one constraint
is aninfeasible solution. We say that a solutionNxhasobjective valuec
T
Nx. A fea-
sible solutionNxwhose objective value is maximum over all feasible solutions is an
optimal solution, and we call its objective valuec
T
Nxtheoptimal objective value.
If a linear program has no feasible solutions, we say that the linear program isin-
feasible; otherwise it isfeasible.  If a linear program has some feasible solutions
but does not have a finite optimal objective value, we say that the linear program
isunbounded.  Exercise 29.1-9 asks you to show that a linear program can have a
finite optimal objective value even if the feasible region is not bounded.

852Chapter 29Linear Programming
Converting linear programs into standard form
It is always possible  to convert  a linear  program,  given as minimizing  or maxi-
mizing a linear function subject to linear constraints, into standard form.  A linear
program might not be in standard form for any of four possible reasons:
1.   The objective function might be a minimization rather than a maximization.
2.   There might be variables without nonnegativity constraints.
3.   There might beequality constraints,  which have an equal  sign rather  than a
less-than-or-equal-to sign.
4.   There  might  beinequality constraints,  but  instead  of  having  a  less-than-or-
equal-to sign, they have a greater-than-or-equal-to sign.
When converting one linear programLinto another linear programL
0
, we would
like the property that an optimal solution toL
0
yields an optimal solution toL.To
capture  this  idea,  we  say  that  two  maximization  linear  programsLandL
0
are
equivalentif  for  each  feasible  solutionNxtoLwith  objective  value ́,  there  is
a  corresponding  feasible  solutionNx
0
toL
0
with  objective  value ́,  and  for  each
feasible solutionNx
0
toL
0
with objective value ́, there is a corresponding feasible
solutionNxtoLwith objective value ́.  (This definition does not imply a one-to-
one correspondence between feasible solutions.) A minimization linear programL
and a maximization linear programL
0
are equivalent if for each feasible solutionNx
toLwith objective value ́, there is a corresponding feasible solutionNx
0
toL
0
with
objective value ́, and for each feasible solutionNx
0
toL
0
with objective value ́,
there is a corresponding feasible solutionNxtoLwith objective value ́.
We now show how to remove, one by one, each of the possible problems in the
list above. After removing each one, we shall argue that the new linear program is
equivalent to the old one.
To convert a minimization linear programLinto an equivalent maximization lin-
ear programL
0
, we simply negate the coefficients in the objective function.  Since
LandL
0
have identical sets of feasible solutions and, for any feasible solution, the
objective value inLis the negative of the objective value inL
0
, these two linear
programs are equivalent. For example, if we have the linear program
minimize2x
1
C3x
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
D7
x
1
2x
2
4
x
1
0;
and we negate the coefficients of the objective function, we obtain

29.1Standard and slack forms853
maximize2x
1
3x
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
D7
x
1
2x
2
4
x
1
0:
Next, we show how to convert a linear program in which some of the variables
do not have nonnegativity constraints into one in which each variable has a non-
negativity constraint. Suppose that some variablex
j
does not have a nonnegativity
constraint.  Then, we replace each occurrence ofx
j
byx
0
j
x
00
j
, and add the non-
negativity constraintsx
0
j
0andx
00
j
0.  Thus, if the objective function has a
termc
j
x
j
, we replace it byc
j
x
0
j
c
j
x
00
j
, and if constraintihasaterma
ij
x
j
,we
replace it bya
ij
x
0
j
a
ij
x
00
j
. Any feasible solutionyxto the new linear program cor-
responds to a feasible solutionNxto the original linear program withNx
j
Dyx
0
j
yx
00
j
and with the same objective value.  Also,  any feasible solutionNxto the original
linear program corresponds to a feasible solutionyxto the new linear program with
yx
0
j
DNx
j
andyx
00
j
D0ifNx
j
0, or withyx
00
j
DNx
j
andyx
0
j
D0ifNx
j
<0.Thetwo
linear programs have the same objective value regardless of the sign ofNx
j
.  Thus,
the two linear programs are equivalent.  We apply this conversion scheme to each
variable that does not have a nonnegativity constraint to yield an equivalent linear
program in which all variables have nonnegativity constraints.
Continuing the example, we want to ensure that each variable has a correspond-
ing nonnegativity constraint. Variablex
1
has such a constraint, but variablex
2
does
not. Therefore, we replacex
2
by two variablesx
0
2
andx
00
2
, and we modify the linear
program to obtain
maximize2x
1
3x
0
2
C3x
00
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
0
2
x
00
2
D7(29.22)
x
1
2x
0
2
C2x
00
2
4
x
1
;x
0
2
;x
00
2
0:
Next, we convert equality constraints into inequality constraints. Suppose that a
linear program has an equality constraintf.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/Db.SincexDyif
and only if bothxyandxy, we can replace this equality constraint by the
pair of inequality constraintsf.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/bandf.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/b.
Repeating this conversion for each equality constraint yields a linear program in
which all constraints are inequalities.
Finally, we can convert the greater-than-or-equal-to constraints to less-than-or-
equal-to constraints by multiplying these constraints through by1.  That is, any
inequality of the form

854Chapter 29Linear Programming
n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
b
i
is equivalent to
n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
b
i
:
Thus, by replacing each coefficienta
ij
bya
ij
and each valueb
i
byb
i
, we obtain
an equivalent less-than-or-equal-to constraint.
Finishing our example, we replace the equality in constraint (29.22) by two in-
equalities, obtaining
maximize2x
1
3x
0
2
C3x
00
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
0
2
x
00
2
7
x
1
Cx
0
2
x
00
2
7(29.23)
x
1
2x
0
2
C2x
00
2
4
x
1
;x
0
2
;x
00
2
0:
Finally,  we negate constraint  (29.23).  For consistency in variable names, we re-
namex
0
2
tox
2
andx
00
2
tox
3
, obtaining the standard form
maximize2x
1
3x
2
C3x
3
(29.24)
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
x
3
7(29.25)
x
1
x
2
Cx
3
7(29.26)
x
1
2x
2
C2x
3
4(29.27)
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
0:(29.28)
Converting linear programs into slack form
To efficiently solve a linear program with the simplex algorithm, we prefer to ex-
press it in a form in which some of the constraints are equality constraints.  More
precisely, we shall convert it into a form in which the nonnegativity constraints are
the only inequality constraints, and the remaining constraints are equalities. Let
n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
b
i
(29.29)

29.1Standard and slack forms855
be an inequality  constraint.   We introduce  a new variablesand rewrite inequal-
ity (29.29) as the two constraints
sDb
i

n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
;(29.30)
s0:(29.31)
We callsaslack variablebecause it measures theslack,  or difference,  between
the left-hand and right-hand sides of equation (29.29). (We shall soon see why we
find it convenient to write the constraint with only the slack variable on the left-
hand side.)  Because inequality (29.29) is true if and only if both equation (29.30)
and inequality (29.31) are true, we can convert each inequality constraint of a lin-
ear program in this way to obtain an equivalent linear program in which the only
inequality  constraints  are  the  nonnegativity  constraints.   When  converting  from
standard to slack form, we shall usex
nCi
(instead ofs) to denote the slack variable
associated with theith inequality. Theith constraint is therefore
x
nCi
Db
i

n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
;(29.32)
along with the nonnegativity constraintx
nCi
0.
By converting each constraint of a linear program in standard form, we obtain a
linear program in a different form.  For example, for the linear program described
in (29.24)–(29.28), we introduce slack variablesx
4
,x
5
,andx
6
, obtaining
maximize2x
1
3x
2
C3x
3
(29.33)
subject to
x
4
D7x
1
x
2
Cx
3
(29.34)
x
5
D7Cx
1
Cx
2
x
3
(29.35)
x
6
D4x
1
C2x
2
2x
3
(29.36)
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
;x
4
;x
5
;x
6
0:(29.37)
In this linear program, all the constraints except for the nonnegativity constraints
are equalities, and each variable is subject to a nonnegativity constraint.  We write
each equality constraint with one of the variables on the left-hand side of the equal-
ity and all others on the right-hand side. Furthermore, each equation has the same
set of variables on the right-hand side, and these variables are also the only ones
that appear in the objective function. We call the variables on the left-hand side of
the equalitiesbasic variablesand those on the right-hand sidenonbasic variables.
For linear programs that satisfy these conditions,  we shall sometimes omit the
words  “maximize”  and  “subject  to,”  as  well  as  the  explicit  nonnegativity  con-
straints.  We shall also use the variable ́to denote the value of the objective func-

856Chapter 29Linear Programming
tion. We call the resulting formatslack form. If we write the linear program given
in (29.33)–(29.37) in slack form, we obtain
 ́D2x
1
3x
2
C3x
3
(29.38)
x
4
D7x
1
x
2
Cx
3
(29.39)
x
5
D7Cx
1
Cx
2
x
3
(29.40)
x
6
D4x
1
C2x
2
2x
3
:(29.41)
As with standard form, we find it convenient  to have a more concise notation
for describing a slack form.  As we shall see in Section 29.3, the sets of basic and
nonbasic variables will change as the simplex algorithm runs. We useNto denote
the set of indices of the nonbasic variables andBto denote the set of indices of
the  basic  variables.   We always  have  that
j
N
j
Dn,
j
B
j
Dm,andN[BD
f
1;2;:::;nCm
g
. The equations are indexed by the entries ofB, and the variables
on the right-hand sides are indexed by the entries ofN. As in standard form, we use
b
i
,c
j
,anda
ij
to denote constant terms and coefficients.  We also useto denote
an optional constant term in the objective function.  (We shall see a little later that
including the constant term in the objective function makes it easy to determine the
value of the objective function.)  Thus we can concisely define a slack form by a
tuple.N;B;A;b;c;/, denoting the slack form
 ́DC
X
j2N
c
j
x
j
(29.42)
x
i
Db
i

X
j2N
a
ij
x
j
fori2B;(29.43)
in which all variablesxare constrained to be nonnegative.  Because we subtract
the  sum
P
j2N
a
ij
x
j
in  (29.43),  the  valuesa
ij
are  actually  the  negatives  of  the
coefficients as they “appear” in the slack form.
For example, in the slack form
 ́D28
x
3
6

x
5
6

2x
6
3
x
1
D8C
x
3
6
C
x
5
6

x
6
3
x
2
D4
8x
3
3

2x
5
3
C
x
6
3
x
4
D18
x
3
2
C
x
5
2
;
we haveBD
f
1; 2; 4
g
,ND
f
3; 5; 6
g
,

29.1Standard and slack forms857
AD

a
13
a
15
a
16
a
23
a
25
a
26
a
43
a
45
a
46

D

1=61=61=3
8=32=31=3
1=21=20

;
bD

b
1
b
2
b
4

D

8
4
18

;
cD

c
3
c
5
c
6

T
D

1=61=62=3

T
,andD28.   Note  that  the
indices intoA,b,andcare not necessarily sets of contiguous integers; they depend
on the index setsBandN. As an example of the entries ofAbeing the negatives
of the coefficients as they appear in the slack form, observe that the equation forx
1
includes the termx
3
=6, yet the coefficienta
13
is actually1=6rather thanC1=6.
Exercises
29.1-1
If  we express  the  linear  program  in  (29.24)–(29.28)  in  the  compact  notation  of
(29.19)–(29.21), what aren,m,A,b,andc?
29.1-2
Give three feasible solutions to the linear program in (29.24)–(29.28).  What is the
objective value of each one?
29.1-3
For the slack form in (29.38)–(29.41), what areN,B,A,b,c,and?
29.1-4
Convert the following linear program into standard form:
minimize2x
1
C7x
2
Cx
3
subject to
x
1
x
3
D7
3x
1
Cx
2
24
x
2
0
x
3
0:

858Chapter 29Linear Programming
29.1-5
Convert the following linear program into slack form:
maximize2x
1
6x
3
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
x
3
7
3x
1
x
2
8
x
1
C2x
2
C2x
3
0
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
0:
What are the basic and nonbasic variables?
29.1-6
Show that the following linear program is infeasible:
maximize3x
1
2x
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
2
2x
1
2x
2
10
x
1
;x
2
0:
29.1-7
Show that the following linear program is unbounded:
maximizex
1
x
2
subject to
2x
1
Cx
2
1
x
1
2x
2
2
x
1
;x
2
0:
29.1-8
Suppose that we have a general linear program withnvariables andmconstraints,
and suppose that we convert  it into standard form.  Give an upper bound on the
number of variables and constraints in the resulting linear program.
29.1-9
Give an example of a linear program for which the feasible region is not bounded,
but the optimal objective value is finite.

29.2Formulating problems as linear programs859
29.2  Formulating problems as linear programs
Although we shall focus on the simplex algorithm in this chapter, it is also impor-
tant to be able to recognize when we can formulate a problem as a linear program.
Once  we cast  a problem  as  a  polynomial-sized  linear  program,  we can  solve  it
in polynomial time by the ellipsoid algorithm or interior-point  methods.  Several
linear-programming software packages can solve problems efficiently, so that once
the problem is in the form of a linear program, such a package can solve it.
We shall look at several concrete examples of linear-programming problems. We
start with two problems that we have already studied:  the single-source shortest-
paths problem (see Chapter 24) and the maximum-flow problem (see Chapter 26).
We then describe the minimum-cost-flow problem.  Although the minimum-cost-
flow problem has a polynomial-time algorithm that is not based on linear program-
ming, we won’t describe the algorithm. Finally, we describe the multicommodity-
flow problem,  for which the only known polynomial-time algorithm  is based on
linear programming.
When we solved  graph  problems  in Part VI,  we used attribute  notation,  such
as:dand.u; /:f.   Linear  programs  typically  use  subscripted  variables  rather
than objects with attached attributes, however.  Therefore, when we express vari-
ables in linear programs, we shall indicate vertices and edges through subscripts.
For example, we denote the shortest-path weight for vertexnot by:dbut byd

.
Similarly, we denote the flow from vertexuto vertexnot by.u; /:fbut byf
u
.
For quantities that are given as inputs to problems, such as edge weights or capac-
ities, we shall continue to use notations such asw.u; /andc.u:/.
Shortest paths
We can formulate  the single-source  shortest-paths  problem  as a linear  program.
In this section,  we shall focus on how to formulate  the single-pair  shortest-path
problem,  leaving  the  extension  to  the  more  general  single-source  shortest-paths
problem as Exercise 29.2-3.
In the single-pair shortest-path problem, we are given a weighted, directed graph
GD.V; E/,  with weight functionwWE!Rmapping  edges to real-valued
weights,  a  source  vertexs,  and  destination  vertext.   We  wish  to  compute  the
valued
t
, which is the weight of a shortest path fromstot.  To express this prob-
lem as a linear program, we need to determine a set of variables and constraints that
define when we have a shortest path fromstot. Fortunately, the Bellman-Ford al-
gorithm  does  exactly  this.   When the Bellman-Ford algorithm  terminates,  it has
computed, for each vertex,avalued

(using subscript notation here rather than
attribute notation) such that for each edge.u; /2E,wehaved

d
u
Cw.u; /.

860Chapter 29Linear Programming
The source vertex initially receives a valued
s
D0, which never changes.  Thus
we obtain the following linear program to compute the shortest-path weight froms
tot:
maximized
t
(29.44)
subject to
d

d
u
Cw.u; /for each edge.u; /2E;(29.45)
d
s
D0:(29.46)
You might be surprised that this linear program maximizes an objective function
when it is supposed to compute shortest paths.  We do not want to minimize the
objective function, since then setting
N
d

D0for all2Vwould yield an optimal
solution  to  the  linear  program  without  solving  the  shortest-paths  problem.   We
maximize because an optimal solution to the shortest-paths problem sets each
N
d

to min
uW.u;/2E
 ̊
N
d
u
Cw.u; /


,sothat
N
d

is the largest value that is less than or
equal  to  all  of  the  values  in  the  set
 ̊
N
d
u
Cw.u; /


.   We  want  to  maximized

for all verticeson a shortest path fromstotsubject to these constraints on all
vertices, and maximizingd
t
achieves this goal.
This linear program has
j
V
j
variablesd

, one for each vertex2V.Italso
has
j
E
j
C1constraints:  one for each edge, plus the additional constraint that the
source vertex’s shortest-path weight always has the value0.
Maximum flow
Next, we express the maximum-flow problem as a linear program.  Recall that we
are  given  a  directed  graphGD.V; E/in  which  each  edge.u; /2Ehas  a
nonnegative capacityc.u; /0, and two distinguished vertices:  a sourcesand
asinkt.  As defined in Section 26.1, a flow is a nonnegative real-valued function
fWV	V!Rthat  satisfies  the  capacity  constraint  and  flow  conservation.   A
maximum  flow is a flow that  satisfies  these  constraints  and maximizes  the  flow
value, which is the total flow coming out of the source minus the total flow into the
source.  A flow, therefore, satisfies linear constraints, and the value of a flow is a
linear function.  Recalling also that we assume thatc.u; /D0if.u; /62Eand
that there are no antiparallel edges, we can express the maximum-flow problem as
a linear program:
maximize
X
2V
f
s

X
2V
f
s
(29.47)
subject to
f
u
c.u; /for eachu; 2V;(29.48)
X
2V
f
u
D
X
2V
f
u
for eachu2V
f
s; t
g
;(29.49)
f
u
0for eachu; 2V:(29.50)

29.2Formulating problems as linear programs861
This linear program  has
j
V
j
2
variables,  corresponding  to the flow between each
pair of vertices, and it has2
j
V
j
2
C
j
V
j
2constraints.
It is usually more efficient to solve a smaller-sized linear program.  The linear
program in (29.47)–(29.50) has, for ease of notation, a flow and capacity of0for
each pair of verticesu; with.u; /62E. It would be more efficient to rewrite the
linear program so that it hasO.VCE/constraints.  Exercise 29.2-5 asks you to
do so.
Minimum-cost flow
In this section, we have used linear programming to solve problems for which we
already knew efficient algorithms.  In fact, an efficient algorithm designed specif-
ically for a problem,  such as Dijkstra’s algorithm  for the single-source  shortest-
paths problem, or the push-relabel method for maximum flow, will often be more
efficient than linear programming, both in theory and in practice.
The real power of linear programming comes from the ability to solve new prob-
lems.  Recall the problem faced by the politician in the beginning of this chapter.
The  problem  of  obtaining  a  sufficient  number  of  votes,  while  not  spending  too
much money, is not solved by any of the algorithms that we have studied in this
book, yet we can solve it by linear programming.  Books abound with such real-
world problems that linear programming can solve.  Linear programming is also
particularly useful for solving variants of problems for which we may not already
know of an efficient algorithm.
Consider, for example, the following generalization of the maximum-flow prob-
lem.  Suppose that, in addition to a capacityc.u; /for each edge.u; /,weare
given a real-valued costa.u; /. As in the maximum-flow problem, we assume that
c.u; /D0if.u; /62E, and that there are no antiparallel edges.  If we sendf
u
units of flow over edge.u; /, we incur a cost ofa.u; /f
u
.  We are also given a
flow demandd.Wewishtosenddunits of flow fromstotwhile minimizing the
total cost
P
.u;/2E
a.u; /f
u
incurred by the flow. This problem is known as the
minimum-cost-flow problem.
Figure 29.3(a) shows an example of the minimum-cost-flow problem.  We wish
to send4units of flow fromstotwhile incurring the minimum total cost.  Any
particular legal flow, that is, a functionfsatisfying constraints (29.48)–(29.49),
incurs a total  cost of
P
.u;/2E
a.u; /f
u
.  We wish to find the particular4-unit
flow that minimizes this cost. Figure 29.3(b) shows an optimal solution, with total
cost
P
.u;/2E
a.u; /f
u
D.22/C.52/C.31/C.71/C.13/D27:
There are polynomial-time algorithms specifically designed for the minimum-
cost-flow problem, but they are beyond the scope of this book.  We can, however,
express the minimum-cost-flow problem as a linear program.  The linear program
looks similar to the one for the maximum-flow problem with the additional con-

862Chapter 29Linear Programming
s
x
t
y
(a)
c = 1
a = 3
c
 = 5
a
 = 2
c
 = 4
a
 = 1
c
 = 2
a
 = 7
c
 = 2
a
 = 5
s
x
t
y
(b)
1/1
a = 3
2/5
a
 = 2
3/4
a
 = 1
1/2
a
 = 7
2/2
a
 = 5
Figure 29.3  (a)An example of a minimum-cost-flow problem. We denote the capacities bycand
the costs bya.Vertexsis the source and vertextis the sink, and we wish to send4units of flow
fromstot.(b)A solution to the minimum-cost flow problem in which4units of flow are sent froms
tot. For each edge, the flow and capacity are written as flow/capacity.
straint  that the value of the flow be exactlydunits,  and with the new objective
function of minimizing the cost:
minimize
X
.u;/2E
a.u; /f
u
(29.51)
subject to
f
u
c.u; /for eachu; 2V;
X
2V
f
u

X
2V
f
u
D0for eachu2V
f
s; t
g
;
X
2V
f
s

X
2V
f
s
Dd;
f
u
0for eachu; 2V:(29.52)
Multicommodity flow
As a final example,  we consider  another flow problem.  Suppose that the Lucky
Puck  company  from  Section  26.1  decides  to  diversify  its  product  line  and  ship
not only hockey pucks, but also hockey sticks and hockey helmets.  Each piece of
equipment  is manufactured  in its own factory,  has its own warehouse,  and must
be shipped, each day, from factory to warehouse.  The sticks are manufactured in
Vancouver and must be shipped to Saskatoon, and the helmets are manufactured in
Edmonton and must be shipped to Regina.  The capacity of the shipping network
does not change, however, and the different items, orcommodities, must share the
same network.
This example is an instance of amulticommodity-flow problem. In this problem,
we are again given a directed graphGD.V; E/in which each edge.u; /2E
has a nonnegative capacityc.u; /0. As in the maximum-flow problem, we im-
plicitly assume thatc.u; /D0for.u; /62E, and that the graph has no antipar-

29.2Formulating problems as linear programs863
allel edges.  In addition,  we are givenkdifferent commodities,K
1
;K
2
;:::;K
k
,
where we specify commodityiby the tripleK
i
D.s
i
;t
i
;d
i
/.  Here, vertexs
i
is
the source of commodityi, vertext
i
is the sink of commodityi,andd
i
is the de-
mand for commodityi, which is the desired flow value for the commodity froms
i
tot
i
. We define a flow for commodityi, denoted byf
i
, (so thatf
iu
is the flow of
commodityifrom vertexuto vertex) to be a real-valued function that satisfies
the flow-conservation and capacity constraints.  We now definef
u
,theaggregate
flow, to be the sum of the various commodity flows, so thatf
u
D
P
k
iD1
f
iu
.The
aggregate flow on edge.u; /must be no more than the capacity of edge.u; /.
We are  not trying  to minimize  any  objective  function  in this  problem;  we need
only determine whether such a flow exists. Thus, we write a linear program with a
“null” objective function:
minimize0
subject to
k
X
iD1
f
iu
c.u; /for eachu; 2V;
X
2V
f
iu

X
2V
f
iu
D0for eachiD1;2;:::;kand
for eachu2V
f
s
i
;t
i
g
;
X
2V
f
i;s
i
;

X
2V
f
i;;s
i
Dd
i
for eachiD1;2;:::;k ;
f
iu
0for eachu; 2Vand
for eachiD1;2;:::;k :
The only known polynomial-time algorithm for this problem expresses it as a linear
program and then solves it with a polynomial-time linear-programming algorithm.
Exercises
29.2-1
Put the single-pair shortest-path linear program from (29.44)–(29.46) into standard
form.
29.2-2
Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the shortest path
from nodesto nodeyin Figure 24.2(a).
29.2-3
In  the  single-source  shortest-paths  problem,  we  want  to  find  the  shortest-path
weights from a source vertexsto all vertices2V.GivenagraphG, write a

864Chapter 29Linear Programming
linear program for which the solution has the property thatd

is the shortest-path
weight fromstofor each vertex2V.
29.2-4
Write out explicitly the linear program corresponding to finding the maximum flow
in Figure 26.1(a).
29.2-5
Rewrite the linear program for maximum flow (29.47)–(29.50) so that it uses only
O.VCE/constraints.
29.2-6
Write a linear program that, given a bipartite graphGD.V; E/, solves the maxi-
mum-bipartite-matching problem.
29.2-7
In theminimum-cost multicommodity-flow problem, we are given directed graph
GD.V; E/in which each edge.u; /2Ehas a nonnegative capacityc.u; /0
and a costa.u; /.  As in the multicommodity-flow problem, we are givenkdif-
ferent commodities,K
1
;K
2
;:::;K
k
, where we specify commodityiby the triple
K
i
D.s
i
;t
i
;d
i
/.Wedefinetheflowf
i
for commodityiand the aggregate flowf
u
on  edge.u; /as  in  the  multicommodity-flow  problem.   A  feasible  flow is  one
in which the aggregate flow on each edge.u; /is no more than the capacity of
edge.u; /.  The cost of a flow is
P
u;2V
a.u; /f
u
, and the goal is to find the
feasible flow of minimum cost. Express this problem as a linear program.
29.3  The simplex algorithm
The simplex algorithm is the classical method for solving linear programs. In con-
trast to most of the other algorithms in this book, its running time is not polynomial
in the worst case.  It does yield insight into linear programs, however, and is often
remarkably fast in practice.
In addition to having a geometric interpretation, described earlier in this chapter,
the simplex algorithm bears some similarity to Gaussian elimination, discussed in
Section 28.1. Gaussian elimination begins with a system of linear equalities whose
solution  is unknown.   In each  iteration,  we rewrite  this  system  in  an equivalent
form that has some additional structure. After some number of iterations, we have
rewritten the system  so that the solution  is simple to obtain.   The simplex algo-
rithm proceeds in a similar manner, and we can view it as Gaussian elimination for
inequalities.

29.3The simplex algorithm865
We now describe  the main idea behind  an iteration  of the simplex algorithm.
Associated with each iteration will be a “basic solution” that we can easily obtain
from  the slack  form  of the linear  program:  set each  nonbasic  variable  to0and
compute the values of the basic variables from the equality constraints. An iteration
converts one slack form into an equivalent slack form.  The objective value of the
associated basic feasible solution will be no less than that at the previous iteration,
and usually greater.  To achieve this increase in the objective value, we choose a
nonbasic variable such that if we were to increase that variable’s value from0,then
the objective value would increase,  too.   The amount by which we can increase
the variable is limited by the other constraints. In particular, we raise it until some
basic variable becomes0.  We then rewrite the slack form,  exchanging the roles
of that basic variable and the chosen nonbasic variable.  Although we have used a
particular setting of the variables to guide the algorithm, and we shall use it in our
proofs, the algorithm does not explicitly maintain this solution.  It simply rewrites
the linear program until an optimal solution becomes “obvious.”
An example of the simplex algorithm
We begin with an extended  example.   Consider  the following  linear  program  in
standard form:
maximize3x
1
Cx
2
C2x
3
(29.53)
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
C3x
3
30(29.54)
2x
1
C2x
2
C5x
3
24(29.55)
4x
1
Cx
2
C2x
3
36(29.56)
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
0:(29.57)
In order to use the simplex algorithm, we must convert the linear program into
slack form; we saw how to do so in Section 29.1. In addition to being an algebraic
manipulation, slack is a useful algorithmic concept.  Recalling from Section 29.1
that  each  variable  has  a  corresponding  nonnegativity  constraint,  we  say  that  an
equality constraint istightfor a particular setting of its nonbasic variables if they
cause the constraint’s basic variable to become0.  Similarly, a setting of the non-
basic  variables  that  would  make  a  basic  variable  become  negativeviolatesthat
constraint.  Thus, the slack variables explicitly maintain how far each constraint is
from being tight, and so they help to determine how much we can increase values
of nonbasic variables without violating any constraints.
Associating the slack variablesx
4
,x
5
,andx
6
with inequalities (29.54)–(29.56),
respectively, and putting the linear program into slack form, we obtain

866Chapter 29Linear Programming
 ́D3x
1
Cx
2
C2x
3
(29.58)
x
4
D30x
1
x
2
3x
3
(29.59)
x
5
D242x
1
2x
2
5x
3
(29.60)
x
6
D364x
1
x
2
2x
3
:(29.61)
The system of constraints (29.59)–(29.61)  has 3 equations and 6 variables.  Any
setting of the variablesx
1
,x
2
,andx
3
defines values forx
4
,x
5
,andx
6
; therefore,
we have an infinite number of solutions to this system of equations.  A solution is
feasible if all ofx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
6
are nonnegative, and there can be an infinite num-
ber of feasible  solutions  as well.   The infinite number  of possible  solutions  to a
system such as this one will be useful in later proofs.  We focus on thebasic solu-
tion:  set all the (nonbasic) variables on the right-hand side to0and then compute
the values of the (basic) variables on the left-hand side.  In this example, the ba-
sic  solution  is.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
6
/D.0;0;0;30;24;36/and  it  has  objective  value
 ́D.30/C.10/C.20/D0.  Observe that this basic solution setsNx
i
Db
i
for eachi2B. An iteration of the simplex algorithm rewrites the set of equations
and  the  objective  function  so  as  to  put  a  different  set  of  variables  on  the  right-
hand side. Thus, a different basic solution is associated with the rewritten problem.
We emphasize that the rewrite does not in any way change the underlying linear-
programming problem; the problem at one iteration has the identical set of feasible
solutions  as the  problem  at  the  previous  iteration.   The problem  does,  however,
have a different basic solution than that of the previous iteration.
If a basic solution is also feasible, we call it abasic feasible solution. Aswerun
the simplex algorithm, the basic solution is almost always a basic feasible solution.
We shall see in Section 29.5, however, that for the first few iterations of the simplex
algorithm, the basic solution might not be feasible.
Our goal, in each iteration, is to reformulate the linear program so that the basic
solution  has  a greater  objective  value.   We select  a  nonbasic  variablex
e
whose
coefficient in the objective function is positive, and we increase the value ofx
e
as
much as possible without violating any of the constraints. The variablex
e
becomes
basic,  and some other  variablex
l
becomes  nonbasic.   The values of other  basic
variables and of the objective function may also change.
To continue the example,  let’s think about  increasing  the value ofx
1
.Aswe
increasex
1
, the values ofx
4
,x
5
,andx
6
all decrease. Because we have a nonnega-
tivity constraint for each variable, we cannot allow any of them to become negative.
Ifx
1
increases above30,thenx
4
becomes negative, andx
5
andx
6
become nega-
tive whenx
1
increases above12and9, respectively. The third constraint (29.61) is
the tightest constraint, and it limits how much we can increasex
1
.  Therefore, we
switch the roles ofx
1
andx
6
. We solve equation (29.61) forx
1
and obtain
x
1
D9
x
2
4

x
3
2

x
6
4
:(29.62)

29.3The simplex algorithm867
To rewrite the other equations withx
6
on the right-hand side, we substitute forx
1
using equation (29.62). Doing so for equation (29.59), we obtain
x
4
D30x
1
x
2
3x
3
D30

9
x
2
4

x
3
2

x
6
4

x
2
3x
3
D21
3x
2
4

5x
3
2
C
x
6
4
:(29.63)
Similarly, we combine equation (29.62) with constraint (29.60) and with objective
function (29.58) to rewrite our linear program in the following form:
 ́D27C
x
2
4
C
x
3
2

3x
6
4
(29.64)
x
1
D9
x
2
4

x
3
2

x
6
4
(29.65)
x
4
D21
3x
2
4

5x
3
2
C
x
6
4
(29.66)
x
5
D6
3x
2
2
4x
3
C
x
6
2
:(29.67)
We call this operation apivot. As demonstrated above, a pivot chooses a nonbasic
variablex
e
, called theentering variable, and a basic variablex
l
, called theleaving
variable, and exchanges their roles.
The linear program described in equations (29.64)–(29.67) is equivalent to the
linear program described in equations (29.58)–(29.61). We perform two operations
in the simplex algorithm: rewrite equations so that variables move between the left-
hand side and the right-hand side, and substitute one equation into another. The first
operation trivially creates an equivalent  problem,  and the second,  by elementary
linear algebra, also creates an equivalent problem. (See Exercise 29.3-3.)
To demonstrate this equivalence, observe that our original basic solution.0; 0;
0; 30; 24; 36/satisfies the new equations (29.65)–(29.67) and has objective value
27C.1=4/0C.1=2/0.3=4/36D0. The basic solution associated with the
new linear program sets the nonbasic values to0and is.9; 0; 0; 21; 6; 0/, with ob-
jective value ́D27.   Simple arithmetic  verifies that this solution  also satisfies
equations (29.59)–(29.61) and, when plugged into objective function (29.58), has
objective value.39/C.10/C.20/D27.
Continuing the example, we wish to find a new variable whose value we wish to
increase.  We do not want to increasex
6
, since as its value increases, the objective
value decreases. We can attempt to increase eitherx
2
orx
3
; let us choosex
3
.How
far can we increasex
3
without violating any of the constraints? Constraint (29.65)
limits it to18,  constraint  (29.66) limits it to42=5,  and constraint  (29.67)  limits
it to3=2.  The third constraint is again the tightest one, and therefore we rewrite
the third constraint so thatx
3
is on the left-hand side andx
5
is on the right-hand

868Chapter 29Linear Programming
side. We then substitute this new equation,x
3
D3=23x
2
=8x
5
=4Cx
6
=8,into
equations (29.64)–(29.66) and obtain the new, but equivalent, system
 ́D
111
4
C
x
2
16

x
5
8

11x
6
16
(29.68)
x
1
D
33
4

x
2
16
C
x
5
8

5x
6
16
(29.69)
x
3
D
3
2

3x
2
8

x
5
4
C
x
6
8
(29.70)
x
4
D
69
4
C
3x
2
16
C
5x
5
8

x
6
16
:(29.71)
This system has the associated basic solution.33=4; 0; 3=2; 69=4; 0; 0/,  with ob-
jective value111=4.   Now the only way to increase  the objective value is to in-
creasex
2
. The three constraints give upper bounds of132,4,and1, respectively.
(We get an upper bound of1from constraint (29.71) because, as we increasex
2
,
the value of the basic variablex
4
increases also.  This constraint, therefore, places
no restriction on how much we can increasex
2
.)  We increasex
2
to4, and it be-
comes nonbasic. Then we solve equation (29.70) forx
2
and substitute in the other
equations to obtain
 ́D28
x
3
6

x
5
6

2x
6
3
(29.72)
x
1
D8C
x
3
6
C
x
5
6

x
6
3
(29.73)
x
2
D4
8x
3
3

2x
5
3
C
x
6
3
(29.74)
x
4
D18
x
3
2
C
x
5
2
:(29.75)
At this point, all coefficients in the objective function are negative. As we shall see
later in this chapter, this situation occurs only when we have rewritten the linear
program so that the basic solution is an optimal solution.  Thus, for this problem,
the  solution.8; 4; 0; 18; 0; 0/,  with  objective  value28,  is  optimal.   We  can  now
return to our original linear program given in (29.53)–(29.57).  The only variables
in the original linear program arex
1
,x
2
,andx
3
, and so our solution isx
1
D8,
x
2
D4,andx
3
D0, with objective value.38/C.14/C.20/D28.Note
that the values of the slack variables in the final solution measure how much slack
remains in each inequality.  Slack variablex
4
is18, and in inequality (29.54), the
left-hand side, with value8C4C0D12,is18less than the right-hand side of30.
Slack variablesx
5
andx
6
are0and indeed,  in inequalities  (29.55)  and (29.56),
the left-hand  and right-hand  sides are equal.   Observe also that  even though  the
coefficients  in  the  original  slack  form  are  integral,  the  coefficients  in  the  other
linear programs are not necessarily integral, and the intermediate solutions are not

29.3The simplex algorithm869
necessarily integral.  Furthermore, the final solution to a linear program need not
be integral; it is purely coincidental that this example has an integral solution.
Pivoting
We now formalize the procedure for pivoting.  The procedure P
IVOTtakesasin-
put  a  slack  form,  given  by  the  tuple.N;B;A;b;c;/,  the  indexlof  the  leav-
ing variablex
l
,  and the indexeof the entering  variablex
e
.  It returns  the tuple
.
y
N;
y
B;
y
A;
y
b;yc;y/describing the new slack form.  (Recall again that the entries of
them	nmatricesAand
y
Aare actually the negatives of the coefficients that appear
in the slack form.)
P
IVOT.N;B;A;b;c;;l;e/
1//Compute the coefficients of the equation for new basic variablex
e
.
2let
y
Abeanewm	nmatrix
3
y
b
e
Db
l
=a
le
4foreachj2N
f
e
g
5ya
ej
Da
lj
=a
le
6ya
el
D1=a
le
7//Compute the coefficients of the remaining constraints.
8foreachi2B
f
l
g
9
y
b
i
Db
i
a
ie
y
b
e
10foreachj2N
f
e
g
11ya
ij
Da
ij
a
ie
ya
ej
12ya
il
Da
ie
ya
el
13//Compute the objective function.
14yDCc
e
y
b
e
15foreachj2N
f
e
g
16yc
j
Dc
j
c
e
ya
ej
17yc
l
Dc
e
ya
el
18//Compute new sets of basic and nonbasic variables.
19
y
NDN
f
e
g
[
f
l
g
20
y
BDB
f
l
g
[
f
e
g
21return.
y
N;
y
B;
y
A;
y
b;yc;y/
P
IVOTworks as follows. Lines 3–6 compute the coefficients in the new equation
forx
e
by rewriting the equation that hasx
l
on the left-hand side to instead havex
e
on the left-hand side.  Lines 8–12 update the remaining equations by substituting
the right-hand side of this new equation for each occurrence ofx
e
.  Lines 14–17
do the same substitution for the objective function, and lines 19 and 20 update the

870Chapter 29Linear Programming
sets of nonbasic and basic variables. Line 21 returns the new slack form. As given,
ifa
le
D0,PIVOTwould cause an error by dividing by0, but as we shall see in the
proofs of Lemmas 29.2 and 29.12, we call P
IVOTonly whena
le
¤0.
We now summarize the effect that P
IVOThas on the values of the variables in
the basic solution.
Lemma 29.1
Consider a call to P
IVOT.N;B;A;b;c;;l;e/in whicha
le
¤0.  Let the values
returned from the call be.
y
N;
y
B;
y
A;
y
b;yc;y/,andletNxdenote the basic solution after
the call. Then
1.Nx
j
D0for eachj2
y
N.
2.Nx
e
Db
l
=a
le
.
3.Nx
i
Db
i
a
ie
y
b
e
for eachi2
y
B
f
e
g
.
ProofThe first statement is true because the basic solution always sets all non-
basic variables to0. When we set each nonbasic variable to0in a constraint
x
i
D
y
b
i

X
j2
y
N
ya
ij
x
j
;
we have thatNx
i
D
y
b
i
for eachi2
y
B.Sincee2
y
B, line 3 of PIVOTgives
Nx
e
D
y
b
e
Db
l
=a
le
;
which proves the second statement.  Similarly, using line 9 for eachi2
y
B
f
e
g
,
we have
Nx
i
D
y
b
i
Db
i
a
ie
y
b
e
;
which proves the third statement.
The formal simplex algorithm
We are now ready to formalize the simplex algorithm, which we demonstrated by
example. That example was a particularly nice one, and we could have had several
other issues to address:

How do we determine whether a linear program is feasible?

What do we do if the linear program is feasible, but the initial basic solution is
not feasible?

How do we determine whether a linear program is unbounded?

How do we choose the entering and leaving variables?

29.3The simplex algorithm871
In Section 29.5,  we shall show how to determine whether a problem is feasible,
and if so, how to find a slack form in which the initial basic solution is feasible.
Therefore, let us assume that we have a procedure I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX.A;b;c/
that  takes  as  input  a  linear  program  in  standard  form,  that  is,  anm	nmatrix
AD.a
ij
/,anm-vectorbD.b
i
/,andann-vectorcD.c
j
/.   If  the  problem  is
infeasible, the procedure returns a message that the program is infeasible and then
terminates.   Otherwise,  the  procedure  returns  a  slack  form  for  which  the  initial
basic solution is feasible.
The procedure S
IMPLEXtakes as input a linear program in standard form, as just
described.  It returns ann-vectorNxD.Nx
j
/that is an optimal solution to the linear
program described in (29.19)–(29.21).
S
IMPLEX.A;b;c/
1.N;B;A;b;c;/DI
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX.A;b;c/
2letbe a new vector of lengthn
3whilesome indexj2Nhasc
j
>0
4choose an indexe2Nfor whichc
e
>0
5foreach indexi2B
6ifa
ie
>0
7
i
Db
i
=a
ie
8else
i
D1
9choose an indexl2Bthat minimizes
i
10if
l
==1
11return“unbounded”
12else.N;B;A;b;c;/DP
IVOT.N;B;A;b;c;;l;e/
13foriD1ton
14ifi2B
15Nx
i
Db
i
16elseNx
i
D0
17return.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
n
/
The  S
IMPLEXprocedure  works  as  follows.   In  line  1,  it  calls  the  procedure
I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX.A;b;c/, described above, which either determines that the
linear program is infeasible or returns a slack form for which the basic solution is
feasible.  Thewhileloop of lines 3–12 forms the main part of the algorithm.  If all
coefficients in the objective function are negative, then thewhileloop terminates.
Otherwise, line 4 selects a variablex
e
, whose coefficient in the objective function
is positive, as the entering variable. Although we may choose any such variable as
the entering variable, we assume that we use some prespecified deterministic rule.
Next, lines 5–9 check each constraint  and pick the one that most severely limits
the amount by which we can increasex
e
without violating any of the nonnegativ-

872Chapter 29Linear Programming
ity constraints; the basic variable associated with this constraint isx
l
.Again,we
are free to choose one of several variables as the leaving variable, but we assume
that we use some prespecified deterministic rule.  If none of the constraints  lim-
its the amount by which the entering variable can increase, the algorithm returns
“unbounded”  in line 11.   Otherwise,  line 12 exchanges  the roles of the entering
and leaving variables by calling P
IVOT.N;B;A;b;c;;l;e/, as described above.
Lines 13–16 compute a solutionNx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
n
for the original linear-programming
variables by setting all the nonbasic variables to0and each basic variableNx
i
tob
i
,
and line 17 returns these values.
To show that S
IMPLEXis correct, we first show that if SIMPLEXhas an initial
feasible solution and eventually terminates, then it either returns a feasible solution
or determines that the linear program is unbounded. Then, we show that S
IMPLEX
terminates.   Finally,  in Section 29.4 (Theorem 29.10)  we show that  the solution
returned is optimal.
Lemma 29.2
Given a linear program.A;b;c/, suppose that the call to I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXin
line 1 of S
IMPLEXreturns a slack form for which the basic solution is feasible.
Then if S
IMPLEXreturns a solution in line 17, that solution is a feasible solution to
the linear program. If S
IMPLEXreturns “unbounded” in line 11, the linear program
is unbounded.
ProofWe use the following three-part loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of thewhileloop of lines 3–12,
1. the  slack  form  is  equivalent  to  the  slack  form  returned  by  the  call  of
I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX,
2. for eachi2B,wehaveb
i
0,and
3. the basic solution associated with the slack form is feasible.
Initialization:The  equivalence  of  the  slack  forms  is  trivial  for  the  first  itera-
tion.  We assume, in the statement of the lemma, that the call to I
NITIALIZE-
S
IMPLEXin line 1 of SIMPLEXreturns a slack form for which the basic solution
is feasible.  Thus, the third part of the invariant is true.  Because the basic so-
lution is feasible, each basic variablex
i
is nonnegative. Furthermore, since the
basic  solution  sets  each  basic  variablex
i
tob
i
,wehavethatb
i
0for all
i2B. Thus, the second part of the invariant holds.
Maintenance:We shall show that each iteration of thewhileloop maintains the
loop invariant, assuming that thereturnstatement in line 11 does not execute.
We shall handle the case in which line 11 executes when we discuss termination.

29.3The simplex algorithm873
An iteration  of thewhileloop  exchanges  the role  of  a basic  and  a nonbasic
variable by calling the P
IVOTprocedure. By Exercise 29.3-3, the slack form is
equivalent to the one from the previous iteration which, by the loop invariant,
is equivalent to the initial slack form.
We now demonstrate the second part of the loop invariant.  We assume that at
the start of each iteration of thewhileloop,b
i
0for eachi2B, and we shall
show that these inequalities remain true after the call to P
IVOTin line 12. Since
the only changes to the variablesb
i
and the setBof basic variables occur in this
assignment, it suffices to show that line 12 maintains this part of the invariant.
We  letb
i
,a
ij
,andBrefer to values before the call of PIVOT,and
y
b
i
refer to
values returned from P
IVOT.
First, we observe that
y
b
e
0becauseb
l
0by the loop invariant,a
le
>0by
lines6and9ofS
IMPLEX,and
y
b
e
Db
l
=a
le
by line 3 of PIVOT.
For the remaining indicesi2B
f
l
g
,wehavethat
y
b
i
Db
i
a
ie
y
b
e
(by line 9 of PIVOT)
Db
i
a
ie
.b
l
=a
le
/(by line 3 of PIVOT)  .(29.76)
We have  two cases  to consider,  depending  on whethera
ie
>0ora
ie
0.
Ifa
ie
>0, then since we choselsuch that
b
l
=a
le
b
i
=a
ie
for alli2B;(29.77)
we have
y
b
i
Db
i
a
ie
.b
l
=a
le
/(by equation (29.76))
b
i
a
ie
.b
i
=a
ie
/(by inequality (29.77))
Db
i
b
i
D0;
and thus
y
b
i
0.Ifa
ie
0, then becausea
le
,b
i
,andb
l
are all nonnegative,
equation (29.76) implies that
y
b
i
must be nonnegative, too.
We now argue that the basic solution is feasible, i.e., that all variables have non-
negative values.  The nonbasic variables are set to0and thus are nonnegative.
Each basic variablex
i
is defined by the equation
x
i
Db
i

X
j2N
a
ij
x
j
:
The basic solution setsNx
i
Db
i
. Using the second part of the loop invariant, we
conclude that each basic variableNx
i
is nonnegative.

874Chapter 29Linear Programming
Termination:Thewhileloop can terminate in one of two ways.  If it terminates
because of the condition in line 3, then the current basic solution is feasible and
line 17 returns this solution.  The other way it terminates is by returning “un-
bounded” in line 11. In this case, for each iteration of theforloop in lines 5–8,
when line 6 is executed, we find thata
ie
0. Consider the solutionNxdefined as
Nx
i
D

1ifiDe;
0ifi2N
f
e
g
;
b
i

P
j2N
a
ij
Nx
j
ifi2B:
We now show that this solution is feasible, i.e., that all variables are nonneg-
ative.  The nonbasic variables other thanNx
e
are0,andNx
e
D1>0; thus all
nonbasic variables are nonnegative. For each basic variableNx
i
,wehave
Nx
i
Db
i

X
j2N
a
ij
Nx
j
Db
i
a
ie
Nx
e
:
The loop invariant implies thatb
i
0, and we havea
ie
0andNx
e
D1>0.
Thus,Nx
i
0.
Now we show that the objective value for the solutionNxis unbounded.  From
equation (29.42), the objective value is
 ́DC
X
j2N
c
j
Nx
j
DCc
e
Nx
e
:
Sincec
e
>0(by line 4 of SIMPLEX)andNx
e
D1, the objective value is1,
and thus the linear program is unbounded.
It remains to show that SIMPLEXterminates,  and when it does terminate,  the
solution it returns is optimal. Section 29.4 will address optimality. We now discuss
termination.
Termination
In the example given in the beginning of this section, each iteration of the simplex
algorithm increased the objective value associated with the basic solution.  As Ex-
ercise 29.3-2 asks you to show, no iteration of S
IMPLEXcan decrease the objective
value associated with the basic solution.  Unfortunately, it is possible that an itera-
tion leaves the objective value unchanged. This phenomenon is calleddegeneracy,
and we shall now study it in greater detail.

29.3The simplex algorithm875
The assignment in line 14 of PIVOT,yDCc
e
y
b
e
, changes the objective value.
Since  S
IMPLEXcalls  PIVOTonly  whenc
e
>0,  the only  way for  the objective
value to remain unchanged (i.e.,yD)isfor
y
b
e
to be0.  This value is assigned
as
y
b
e
Db
l
=a
le
in line 3 of PIVOT.  Since we always call PIVOTwitha
le
¤0,we
see that for
y
b
e
to equal0, and hence the objective value to be unchanged, we must
haveb
l
D0.
Indeed, this situation can occur. Consider the linear program
 ́Dx
1
Cx
2
Cx
3
x
4
D8x
1
x
2
x
5
Dx
2
x
3
:
Suppose that we choosex
1
as the entering variable andx
4
as the leaving variable.
After pivoting, we obtain
 ́D8Cx
3
x
4
x
1
D8x
2
x
4
x
5
Dx
2
x
3
:
At this point, our only choice is to pivot withx
3
entering andx
5
leaving.  Since
b
5
D0, the objective value of8remains unchanged after pivoting:
 ́D8Cx
2
x
4
x
5
x
1
D8x
2
x
4
x
3
Dx
2
x
5
:
The objective value has not changed,  but our slack form has.  Fortunately,  if we
pivot again, withx
2
entering andx
1
leaving, the objective value increases (to16),
and the simplex algorithm can continue.
Degeneracy can prevent the simplex algorithm from terminating, because it can
lead to a phenomenon  known ascycling:  the slack forms at two different  itera-
tions of S
IMPLEXare identical.  Because of degeneracy, SIMPLEXcould choose a
sequence of pivot operations that leave the objective value unchanged but repeat
a slack form within the sequence.  Since S
IMPLEXis a deterministic algorithm, if
it cycles, then it will cycle through the same series of slack forms forever, never
terminating.
Cycling is the only reason that S
IMPLEXmight not terminate. To show this fact,
we must first develop some additional machinery.
At  each  iteration,  S
IMPLEXmaintainsA,b,c,andin  addition  to  the  sets
NandB.   Although  we need  to explicitly  maintainA,b,c,andin  order  to
implement the simplex algorithm  efficiently,  we can get by without maintaining
them.  In other words, the sets of basic and nonbasic variables suffice to uniquely
determine the slack form.  Before proving this fact,  we prove a useful algebraic
lemma.

876Chapter 29Linear Programming
Lemma 29.3
LetIbe a set of indices. For eachj2I,let ̨
j
andˇ
j
be real numbers, and letx
j
be a real-valued variable.  Let
be any real number.  Suppose that for any settings
of thex
j
,wehave
X
j2I
 ̨
j
x
j
D
C
X
j2I
ˇ
j
x
j
:(29.78)
Then ̨
j
Dˇ
j
for eachj2I,and
D0.
ProofSince equation (29.78) holds for any values of thex
j
, we can use particular
values to draw conclusions about ̨,ˇ,and
.Ifweletx
j
D0for eachj2I,
we conclude that
D0.  Now pick an arbitrary indexj2I, and setx
j
D1and
x
k
D0for allk¤j.  Then we must have ̨
j
Dˇ
j
.  Since we pickedjas any
index inI, we conclude that ̨
j
Dˇ
j
for eachj2I.
A particular linear program has many different slack forms; recall that each slack
form has the same set of feasible and optimal solutions as the original linear pro-
gram. We now show that the slack form of a linear program is uniquely determined
by the set of basic variables. That is, given the set of basic variables, a unique slack
form (unique set of coefficients and right-hand sides) is associated with those basic
variables.
Lemma 29.4
Let.A;b;c/be a linear program in standard form. Given a setBof basic variables,
the associated slack form is uniquely determined.
ProofAssume for the purpose of contradiction that there are two different slack
forms  with  the  same setBof  basic  variables.   The slack  forms  must  also  have
identical setsND
f
1;2;:::;nCm
g
Bof nonbasic variables. We write the first
slack form as
 ́DC
X
j2N
c
j
x
j
(29.79)
x
i
Db
i

X
j2N
a
ij
x
j
fori2B;(29.80)
and the second as
 ́D
0
C
X
j2N
c
0
j
x
j
(29.81)
x
i
Db
0
i

X
j2N
a
0
ij
x
j
fori2B:(29.82)

29.3The simplex algorithm877
Consider  the  system  of  equations  formed  by  subtracting  each  equation  in
line (29.82)  from the corresponding  equation in line (29.80).  The resulting sys-
tem is
0D.b
i
b
0
i
/
X
j2N
.a
ij
a
0
ij
/x
j
fori2B
or, equivalently,
X
j2N
a
ij
x
j
D.b
i
b
0
i
/C
X
j2N
a
0
ij
x
j
fori2B:
Now, for eachi2B, apply Lemma 29.3 with ̨
j
Da
ij
,ˇ
j
Da
0
ij
,
Db
i
b
0
i
,and
IDN.Since ̨
i
Dˇ
i
,wehavethata
ij
Da
0
ij
for eachj2N, and since
D0,
we have thatb
i
Db
0
i
.  Thus, for the two slack forms,Aandbare identical toA
0
andb
0
.  Using a similar argument, Exercise 29.3-1 shows that it must also be the
case thatcDc
0
andD
0
, and hence that the slack forms must be identical.
We can now show that cycling is the only possible reason that SIMPLEXmight
not terminate.
Lemma 29.5
If S
IMPLEXfails to terminate in at most

nCm
m

iterations, then it cycles.
ProofBy Lemma 29.4, the setBof basic variables uniquely determines a slack
form.  There arenCmvariables and
j
B
j
Dm, and therefore,  there are at most

nCm
m

ways to chooseB.  Thus, there are only at most

nCm
m

unique slack forms.
Therefore, if S
IMPLEXruns for more than

nCm
m

iterations, it must cycle.
Cycling is theoretically possible, but extremely rare. We can prevent it by choos-
ing the entering and leaving variables somewhat more carefully.  One option is to
perturb  the input  slightly  so that  it is impossible  to have two solutions  with the
same objective value. Another option is to break ties by always choosing the vari-
able with the smallest index, a strategy known asBland’s rule. We omit the proof
that these strategies avoid cycling.
Lemma 29.6
If lines 4 and 9 of S
IMPLEXalways break ties by choosing the variable with the
smallest index, then S
IMPLEXmust terminate.
We conclude this section with the following lemma.

878Chapter 29Linear Programming
Lemma 29.7
Assuming that I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXreturns a slack form for which the basic so-
lution is feasible, S
IMPLEXeither reports that a linear program is unbounded, or it
terminates with a feasible solution in at most

nCm
m

iterations.
ProofLemmas 29.2 and 29.6 show that if I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXreturns a slack
form for which the basic solution is feasible, S
IMPLEXeither reports that a linear
program  is unbounded,  or it terminates  with a feasible  solution.   By the contra-
positive of Lemma 29.5, if  S
IMPLEXterminates with a feasible solution,  then it
terminates in at most

nCm
m

iterations.
Exercises
29.3-1
Complete the proof of Lemma 29.4 by showing that it must be the case thatcDc
0
andD
0
.
29.3-2
Show that the call to P
IVOTin line 12 of SIMPLEXnever decreases the value of.
29.3-3
Prove that the slack form given to the P
IVOTprocedure and the slack form that the
procedure returns are equivalent.
29.3-4
Suppose  we  convert  a  linear  program.A;b;c/in  standard  form  to  slack  form.
Show that the basic solution is feasible if and only ifb
i
0foriD1;2;:::;m.
29.3-5
Solve the following linear program using S
IMPLEX:
maximize18x
1
C12:5x
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
20
x
1
12
x
2
16
x
1
;x
2
0:

29.4Duality879
29.3-6
Solve the following linear program using S
IMPLEX:
maximize5x
1
3x
2
subject to
x
1
x
2
1
2x
1
Cx
2
2
x
1
;x
2
0:
29.3-7
Solve the following linear program using S
IMPLEX:
minimizex
1
Cx
2
Cx
3
subject to
2x
1
C7:5x
2
C3x
3
10000
20x
1
C5x
2
C10x
3
30000
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
0:
29.3-8
In the proof of Lemma 29.5, we argued that there are at most

mCn
n

ways to choose
a setBof basic variables. Give an example of a linear program in which there are
strictly fewer than

mCn
n

ways to choose the setB.
29.4  Duality
We have proven that, under certain assumptions, SIMPLEXterminates. We have not
yet shown that it actually finds an optimal solution to a linear program, however.
In order  to do so,  we introduce  a powerful  concept  calledlinear-programming
duality.
Duality enables us to prove that a solution is indeed optimal.  We saw an exam-
ple of duality in Chapter 26 with Theorem 26.6, the max-flow min-cut theorem.
Suppose that,  given an instance  of a maximum-flow problem,  we find a flowf
with value
j
f
j
. How do we know whetherfis a maximum flow? By the max-flow
min-cut theorem, if we can find a cut whose value is also
j
f
j
,thenwehavever-
ified thatfis indeed a maximum flow.  This relationship provides an example of
duality: given a maximization problem, we define a related minimization problem
such that the two problems have the same optimal objective values.
Given a linear program in which the objective is to maximize, we shall describe
how to formulate aduallinear program in which the objective is to minimize and

880Chapter 29Linear Programming
whose optimal value is identical to that of the original linear program. When refer-
ring to dual linear programs, we call the original linear program theprimal.
Given a primal linear program in standard form, as in (29.16)–(29.18), we define
the dual linear program as
minimize
m
X
iD1
b
i
y
i
(29.83)
subject to
m
X
iD1
a
ij
y
i
c
j
forjD1;2;:::;n ;(29.84)
y
i
0foriD1;2;:::;m :(29.85)
To form the dual, we change the maximization to a minimization, exchange the
roles of coefficients on the right-hand sides and the objective function, and replace
each less-than-or-equal-to by a greater-than-or-equal-to.  Each of themconstraints
in the primal has an associated variabley
i
in the dual, and each of thenconstraints
in the dual has an associated variablex
j
in the primal.  For example, consider the
linear program given in (29.53)–(29.57). The dual of this linear program is
minimize30y
1
C24y
2
C36y
3
(29.86)
subject to
y
1
C2y
2
C4y
3
3(29.87)
y
1
C2y
2
Cy
3
1(29.88)
3y
1
C5y
2
C2y
3
2(29.89)
y
1
;y
2
;y
3
0:(29.90)
We shall show in Theorem 29.10 that the optimal value of the dual linear pro-
gram is always equal to the optimal value of the primal linear program.  Further-
more, the simplex algorithm actually implicitly solves both the primal and the dual
linear programs simultaneously, thereby providing a proof of optimality.
We begin by demonstratingweak duality,  which states that any feasible solu-
tion to the primal linear program has a value no greater than that of any feasible
solution to the dual linear program.
Lemma 29.8 (Weak linear-programming duality)
LetNxbe any feasible solution to the primal linear program in (29.16)–(29.18) and
letNybe any feasible solution to the dual linear program in (29.83)–(29.85).  Then,
we have
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
:

29.4Duality881
ProofWe have
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j

n
X
jD1
 
m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
!
Nx
j
(by inequalities (29.84))
D
m
X
iD1
 
n
X
jD1
a
ij
Nx
j
!
Ny
i

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
(by inequalities (29.17)) .
Corollary 29.9
LetNxbe a feasible  solution to a primal linear program.A;b;c/,andletNybe a
feasible solution to the corresponding dual linear program. If
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j
D
m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
;
thenNxandNyare optimal solutions to the primal and dual linear programs, respec-
tively.
ProofBy Lemma 29.8,  the objective value of a feasible solution to the primal
cannot exceed that of a feasible solution to the dual.  The primal linear program is
a maximization problem and the dual is a minimization problem. Thus, if feasible
solutionsNxandNyhave the same objective value, neither can be improved.
Before proving that there always is a dual solution whose value is equal to that
of  an  optimal  primal  solution,  we describe  how  to  find  such  a  solution.   When
we ran the simplex algorithm on the linear program in (29.53)–(29.57),  the final
iteration yielded the slack form (29.72)–(29.75) with objective ́D28x
3
=6
x
5
=62x
6
=3,BD
f
1; 2; 4
g
,andND
f
3; 5; 6
g
. As we shall show below, the basic
solution associated with the final slack form is indeed an optimal solution to the
linear program; an optimal solution to linear program (29.53)–(29.57) is therefore
.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;Nx
3
/D.8;4;0/, with objective value.38/C.14/C.20/D28.As
we also show below, we can read off an optimal dual solution: the negatives of the
coefficients of the primal objective function are the values of the dual variables.
More precisely, suppose that the last slack form of the primal is
 ́D
0
C
X
j2N
c
0
j
x
j
x
i
Db
0
i

X
j2N
a
0
ij
x
j
fori2B:

882Chapter 29Linear Programming
Then, to produce an optimal dual solution, we set
Ny
i
D
(
c
0
nCi
if.nCi/2N;
0otherwise:
(29.91)
Thus, an optimal solution to the dual linear program defined in (29.86)–(29.90)
isNy
1
D0(sincenC1D42B),Ny
2
Dc
0
5
D1=6,andNy
3
Dc
0
6
D2=3.
Evaluating  the  dual  objective  function  (29.86),  we  obtain  an  objective  value  of
.300/C.24.1=6//C.36.2=3//D28, which confirms that the objective value
of the primal is indeed equal to the objective value of the dual.  Combining these
calculations with Lemma 29.8 yields a proof that the optimal objective value of the
primal linear program is28.  We now show that this approach applies in general:
we can find an optimal solution to the dual and simultaneously prove that a solution
to the primal is optimal.
Theorem 29.10 (Linear-programming duality)
Suppose  that  S
IMPLEXreturns  valuesNxD.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
n
/for  the  primal  lin-
ear program.A;b;c/.LetNandBdenote the nonbasic and basic variables for
the final slack form, letc
0
denote the coefficients in the final slack form, and let
NyD.Ny
1
;Ny
2
;:::;Ny
m
/be defined by  equation  (29.91).   ThenNxis an optimal  so-
lution  to  the  primal  linear  program,Nyis  an  optimal  solution  to  the  dual  linear
program, and
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j
D
m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
:(29.92)
ProofBy Corollary 29.9, if we can find feasible solutionsNxandNythat satisfy
equation  (29.92),  thenNxandNymust be optimal  primal  and dual  solutions.   We
shall now show that the solutionsNxandNydescribed in the statement of the theorem
satisfy equation (29.92).
Suppose  that  we run  S
IMPLEXon  a  primal  linear  program,  as  given  in  lines
(29.16)–(29.18).  The algorithm proceeds through a series of slack forms until it
terminates with a final slack form with objective function
 ́D
0
C
X
j2N
c
0
j
x
j
:(29.93)
Since S
IMPLEXterminated with a solution, by the condition in line 3 we know that
c
0
j
0for allj2N:(29.94)

29.4Duality883
If we define
c
0
j
D0for allj2B;(29.95)
we can rewrite equation (29.93) as
 ́D
0
C
X
j2N
c
0
j
x
j
D
0
C
X
j2N
c
0
j
x
j
C
X
j2B
c
0
j
x
j
(becausec
0
j
D0ifj2B)
D
0
C
nCm
X
jD1
c
0
j
x
j
(becauseN[BD
f
1;2;:::;nCm
g
) .   (29.96)
For the basic solutionNxassociated with this final slack form,Nx
j
D0for allj2N,
and ́D
0
. Since all slack forms are equivalent, if we evaluate the original objec-
tive function onNx, we must obtain the same objective value:
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j
D
0
C
nCm
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j
(29.97)
D
0
C
X
j2N
c
0
j
Nx
j
C
X
j2B
c
0
j
Nx
j
D
0
C
X
j2N
.c
0
j
0/C
X
j2B
.0Nx
j
/(29.98)
D
0
:
We shall now show thatNy, defined by equation (29.91), is feasible for the dual
linear  program  and that its objective  value
P
m
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
equals
P
n
jD1
c
j
Nx
j
.  Equa-
tion (29.97) says that the first and last slack forms, evaluated atNx, are equal. More
generally,  the  equivalence  of  all  slack  forms  implies  that  foranyset  of  values
xD.x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
/,wehave
n
X
jD1
c
j
x
j
D
0
C
nCm
X
jD1
c
0
j
x
j
:
Therefore, for any particular set of valuesNxD.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
n
/,wehave

884Chapter 29Linear Programming
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j
D
0
C
nCm
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j
D
0
C
n
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j
C
nCm
X
jDnC1
c
0
j
Nx
j
D
0
C
n
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j
C
m
X
iD1
c
0
nCi
Nx
nCi
D
0
C
n
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j
C
m
X
iD1
.Ny
i
/Nx
nCi
(by equations (29.91) and (29.95))
D
0
C
n
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j
C
m
X
iD1
.Ny
i
/
 
b
i

n
X
jD1
a
ij
Nx
j
!
(by equation (29.32))
D
0
C
n
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
C
m
X
iD1
n
X
jD1
.a
ij
Nx
j
/Ny
i
D
0
C
n
X
jD1
c
0
j
Nx
j

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
C
n
X
jD1
m
X
iD1
.a
ij
Ny
i
/Nx
j
D
 

0

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
!
C
n
X
jD1
 
c
0
j
C
m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
!
Nx
j
;
so that
n
X
jD1
c
j
Nx
j
D
 

0

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
!
C
n
X
jD1
 
c
0
j
C
m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
!
Nx
j
:(29.99)
Applying Lemma 29.3 to equation (29.99), we obtain

0

m
X
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
D0;(29.100)
c
0
j
C
m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
Dc
j
forjD1;2;:::;n :(29.101)
By equation (29.100), we have that
P
m
iD1
b
i
Ny
i
D
0
, and hence the objective value
of  the dual

P
m
iD1
b
i
Ny
i

is equal  to that  of the primal  (
0
).   It remains  to show

29.4Duality885
that the solutionNyis feasible for the dual problem.  From inequalities (29.94) and
equations (29.95), we have thatc
0
j
0for alljD1;2;:::;nCm. Hence, for any
jD1;2;:::;n, equations (29.101) imply that
c
j
Dc
0
j
C
m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i

m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
;
which satisfies the constraints (29.84) of the dual.  Finally, sincec
0
j
0for each
j2N[B, when we setNyaccording to equation (29.91), we have that eachNy
i
0,
and so the nonnegativity constraints are satisfied as well.
We have shown that, given a feasible linear program, if INITIALIZE-SIMPLEX
returns  a  feasible  solution,  and  if  SIMPLEXterminates  without  returning  “un-
bounded,” then the solution returned is indeed an optimal solution.  We have also
shown how to construct an optimal solution to the dual linear program.
Exercises
29.4-1
Formulate the dual of the linear program given in Exercise 29.3-5.
29.4-2
Suppose  that  we have  a linear  program  that  is  not  in  standard  form.   We could
produce the dual by first converting it to standard form, and then taking the dual.
It  would  be  more  convenient,  however,  to  be  able  to  produce  the  dual  directly.
Explain how we can directly take the dual of an arbitrary linear program.
29.4-3
Write  down  the  dual  of  the  maximum-flow  linear  program,  as  given  in  lines
(29.47)–(29.50)  on  page  860.    Explain  how  to  interpret  this  formulation  as  a
minimum-cut problem.
29.4-4
Write down the dual of the minimum-cost-flow linear program, as given in lines
(29.51)–(29.52)  on page 862.  Explain how to interpret  this problem in terms of
graphs and flows.
29.4-5
Show that the dual of the dual of a linear program is the primal linear program.

886Chapter 29Linear Programming
29.4-6
Which result from Chapter 26 can be interpreted as weak duality for the maximum-
flow problem?
29.5  The initial basic feasible solution
In this section, we first describe how to test whether a linear program is feasible,
and if it is, how to produce a slack form for which the basic solution is feasible.
We conclude by proving the fundamental theorem of linear programming, which
says that the S
IMPLEXprocedure always produces the correct result.
Finding an initial solution
In Section 29.3, we assumed that we had a procedure I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXthat
determines whether a linear program has any feasible solutions, and if it does, gives
a slack form for which the basic solution is feasible.  We describe this procedure
here.
A  linear  program  can  be  feasible,  yet  the  initial  basic  solution  might  not  be
feasible. Consider, for example, the following linear program:
maximize2x
1
x
2
(29.102)
subject to
2x
1
x
2
2(29.103)
x
1
5x
2
4(29.104)
x
1
;x
2
0:(29.105)
If we were to convert this linear program to slack form, the basic solution would
setx
1
D0andx
2
D0. This solution violates constraint (29.104), and so it is not a
feasible solution. Thus, I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXcannot just return the obvious slack
form.  In order to determine whether a linear program has any feasible solutions,
we will formulate anauxiliary linear program.  For this auxiliary linear program,
we can find (with a little work) a slack form for which the basic solution is feasible.
Furthermore, the solution of this auxiliary linear program determines whether the
initial linear program is feasible and if so, it provides a feasible solution with which
we can initialize S
IMPLEX.
Lemma 29.11
LetLbe a linear program in standard form, given as in (29.16)–(29.18). Letx
0
be
a new variable, and letL
aux
be the following linear program withnC1variables:

29.5    The initial basic feasible solution887
maximizex
0
(29.106)
subject to
n
X
jD1
a
ij
x
j
x
0
b
i
foriD1;2;:::;m ;(29.107)
x
j
0forjD0; 1; : : : ; n :(29.108)
ThenLis feasible if and only if the optimal objective value ofL
aux
is0.
ProofSuppose  thatLhas a feasible  solutionNxD.Nx
1
;Nx
2
;:::;Nx
n
/.   Then the
solutionNx
0
D0combined  withNxis  a  feasible  solution  toL
aux
with  objective
value0.Sincex
0
0is  a  constraint  ofL
aux
and  the  objective  function  is  to
maximizex
0
, this solution must be optimal forL
aux
.
Conversely, suppose that the optimal objective value ofL
aux
is0.ThenNx
0
D0,
and the remaining solution values ofNxsatisfy the constraints ofL.
We now describe our strategy to find an initial basic feasible solution for a linear
programLin standard form:
I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX.A;b;c/
1letkbe the index of the minimumb
i
2ifb
k
0//is the initial basic solution feasible?
3return.
f
1;2;:::;n
g
;
f
nC1; nC2;:::;nCm
g
;A;b;c;0/
4formL
aux
by addingx
0
to the left-hand side of each constraint
and setting the objective function tox
0
5let.N;B;A;b;c;/be the resulting slack form forL
aux
6lDnCk
7//L
aux
hasnC1nonbasic variables andmbasic variables.
8.N;B;A;b;c;/DP
IVOT.N;B;A;b;c;;l;0/
9//The basic solution is now feasible forL
aux
.
10iterate thewhileloop of lines 3–12 of S
IMPLEXuntil an optimal solution
toL
aux
is found
11ifthe optimal solution toL
aux
setsNx
0
to0
12ifNx
0
is basic
13perform one (degenerate) pivot to make it nonbasic
14from the final slack form ofL
aux
, removex
0
from the constraints and
restore the original objective function ofL, but replace each basic
variable in this objective function by the right-hand side of its
associated constraint
15returnthe modified final slack form
16else return“infeasible”

888Chapter 29Linear Programming
INITIALIZE-SIMPLEXworks  as  follows.   In  lines  1–3,  we  implicitly  test  the
basic solution  to the initial slack form forLgiven byND
f
1;2;:::;n
g
,BD
f
nC1; nC2;:::;nCm
g
,Nx
i
Db
i
for alli2B,andNx
j
D0for allj2N.
(Creating the slack form requires no explicit effort, as the values ofA,b,andcare
the same in both slack and standard forms.) If line 2 finds this basic solution to be
feasible—that is,Nx
i
0for alli2N[B—then line 3 returns the slack form.
Otherwise, in line 4, we form the auxiliary linear programL
aux
as in Lemma 29.11.
Since the initial basic solution toLis not feasible, the initial basic solution to the
slack form forL
aux
cannot be feasible either.  To find a basic feasible solution, we
perform a single pivot operation.  Line 6 selectslDnCkas the index of the
basic variable  that  will be the leaving  variable  in the upcoming  pivot  operation.
Since the basic variables arex
nC1
;x
nC2
;:::;x
nCm
, the leaving variablex
l
will be
the one with the most negative value.   Line 8 performs that call of  P
IVOT,  with
x
0
entering andx
l
leaving.  We shall see shortly that the basic solution resulting
from this call of P
IVOTwill be feasible. Now that we have a slack form for which
the basic solution  is feasible,  we can,  in line 10,  repeatedly  call  P
IVOTto fully
solve the auxiliary linear program.  As the test in line 11 demonstrates, if we find
an optimal solution toL
aux
with objective value0, then in lines 12–14, we create
a slack  form  forLfor which  the  basic  solution  is  feasible.   To do so,  we first,
in  lines  12–13,  handle  the  degenerate  case  in  whichx
0
may  still  be  basic  with
valueNx
0
D0.  In this case, we perform a pivot step to removex
0
from the basis,
using  anye2Nsuch  thata
0e
¤0as  the  entering  variable.   The  new  basic
solution remains feasible;  the degenerate pivot does not change the value of any
variable.  Next we delete allx
0
terms from the constraints and restore the original
objective function forL.  The original objective function may contain both basic
and nonbasic variables.  Therefore, in the objective function we replace each basic
variable by the right-hand side of its associated constraint.  Line 15 then returns
this modified slack form.  If, on the other hand, line 11 discovers that the original
linear programLis infeasible, then line 16 returns this information.
We now demonstrate the operation of I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXon the linear pro-
gram (29.102)–(29.105).   This linear program is feasible if we can find nonneg-
ative values forx
1
andx
2
that satisfy inequalities  (29.103) and (29.104).  Using
Lemma 29.11, we formulate the auxiliary linear program
maximizex
0
(29.109)
subject to
2x
1
x
2
x
0
2(29.110)
x
1
5x
2
x
0
4(29.111)
x
1
;x
2
;x
0
0:
By Lemma 29.11,  if the optimal objective value of this auxiliary linear program
is0, then the original linear program has a feasible solution. If the optimal objective

29.5    The initial basic feasible solution889
value of this auxiliary linear program is negative, then the original linear program
does not have a feasible solution.
We write this linear program in slack form, obtaining
 ́Dx
0
x
3
D22x
1
Cx
2
Cx
0
x
4
D4x
1
C5x
2
Cx
0
:
We  are  not  out  of  the  woods  yet,  because  the  basic  solution,  which  would  set
x
4
D4, is not feasible for this auxiliary linear program.  We can, however, with
one call to P
IVOT, convert this slack form into one in which the basic solution is
feasible. As line 8 indicates, we choosex
0
to be the entering variable. In line 6, we
choose as the leaving variablex
4
, which is the basic variable whose value in the
basic solution is most negative. After pivoting, we have the slack form
 ́D4x
1
C5x
2
x
4
x
0
D4Cx
1
5x
2
Cx
4
x
3
D6x
1
4x
2
Cx
4
:
The associated basic solution is.Nx
0
;Nx
1
;Nx
2
;Nx
3
;Nx
4
/D.4;0;0;6;0/, which is feasi-
ble. We now repeatedly call P
IVOTuntil we obtain an optimal solution toL
aux
.In
this case, one call to P
IVOTwithx
2
entering andx
0
leaving yields
 ́Dx
0
x
2
D
4
5

x
0
5
C
x
1
5
C
x
4
5
x
3
D
14
5
C
4x
0
5

9x
1
5
C
x
4
5
:
This slack form is the final solution to the auxiliary problem.  Since this solution
hasx
0
D0, we know that our initial problem was feasible.  Furthermore,  since
x
0
D0,  we can just remove it from the set of constraints.   We then restore the
original  objective  function,  with  appropriate  substitutions  made  to  include  only
nonbasic variables. In our example, we get the objective function
2x
1
x
2
D2x
1


4
5

x
0
5
C
x
1
5
C
x
4
5

:
Settingx
0
D0and simplifying, we get the objective function

4
5
C
9x
1
5

x
4
5
;
and the slack form

890Chapter 29Linear Programming
 ́D
4
5
C
9x
1
5

x
4
5
x
2
D
4
5
C
x
1
5
C
x
4
5
x
3
D
14
5

9x
1
5
C
x
4
5
:
This slack form has a feasible  basic solution,  and we can return it to procedure
S
IMPLEX.
We now formally show the correctness of I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX.
Lemma 29.12
If a linear programLhas no feasible solution, then I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXreturns
“infeasible.”  Otherwise, it returns a valid slack form for which the basic solution
is feasible.
ProofFirst suppose that the linear programLhas no feasible solution.  Then by
Lemma 29.11, the optimal objective value ofL
aux
, defined in (29.106)–(29.108),
is nonzero, and by the nonnegativity constraint onx
0
, the optimal objective value
must be negative.  Furthermore,  this objective value must be finite,  since setting
x
i
D0,foriD1;2;:::;n,andx
0
D
j
min
m
iD1
f
b
i
gj
is feasible, and this solution
has objective value
j
min
m
iD1
f
b
i
gj
.  Therefore,  line 10 of I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX
finds a solution  with a nonpositive  objective  value.   LetNxbe the basic  solution
associated with the final slack form.  We cannot haveNx
0
D0, because thenL
aux
would have objective value0, which contradicts that the objective value is negative.
Thus the test in line 11 results in line 16 returning “infeasible.”
Suppose  now  that  the  linear  programLdoes  have  a  feasible  solution.   From
Exercise 29.3-4, we know that ifb
i
0foriD1;2;:::;m, then the basic solution
associated with the initial slack form is feasible.  In this case, lines 2–3 return the
slack form associated with the input.  (Converting the standard form to slack form
is easy, sinceA,b,andcare the same in both.)
In the remainder of the proof, we handle the case in which the linear program is
feasible but we do not return in line 3. We argue that in this case, lines 4–10 find a
feasible solution toL
aux
with objective value0. First, by lines 1–2, we must have
b
k
<0;
and
b
k
b
i
for eachi2B:(29.112)
In line 8, we perform one pivot operation in which the leaving variablex
l
(recall
thatlDnCk,sothatb
l
<0) is the left-hand side of the equation with mini-
mumb
i
, and the entering variable isx
0
, the extra added variable.  We now show

29.5    The initial basic feasible solution891
that after this pivot, all entries ofbare nonnegative, and hence the basic solution
toL
aux
is feasible.   LettingNxbe  the basic  solution  after the  call  to  PIVOT,and
letting
y
band
y
Bbe values returned by P
IVOT, Lemma 29.1 implies that
Nx
i
D
(
b
i
a
ie
y
b
e
ifi2
y
B
f
e
g
;
b
l
=a
le
ifiDe:
(29.113)
The call  to  P
IVOTin line  8  haseD0.   If  we rewrite  inequalities  (29.107),  to
include coefficientsa
i0
,
n
X
jD0
a
ij
x
j
b
i
foriD1;2;:::;m ;(29.114)
then
a
i0
Da
ie
D1for eachi2B:(29.115)
(Note thata
i0
is the  coefficient  ofx
0
as it  appears  in inequalities  (29.114),  not
the negation of the coefficient, becauseL
aux
is in standard rather than slack form.)
Sincel2B,wealsohavethata
le
D1.  Thus,b
l
=a
le
>0,andsoNx
e
>0.For
the remaining basic variables, we have
Nx
i
Db
i
a
ie
y
b
e
(by equation (29.113))
Db
i
a
ie
.b
l
=a
le
/(by line 3 of PIVOT)
Db
i
b
l
(by equation (29.115) anda
le
D1)
0(by inequality (29.112))  ,
which implies that each basic variable is now nonnegative.  Hence the basic solu-
tion after the call to P
IVOTin line 8 is feasible.  We next execute line 10, which
solvesL
aux
.  Since we have assumed thatLhas a feasible solution, Lemma 29.11
implies thatL
aux
has an optimal solution with objective value0. Since all the slack
forms are equivalent, the final basic solution toL
aux
must haveNx
0
D0, and after
removingx
0
from the linear program, we obtain a slack form that is feasible forL.
Line 15 then returns this slack form.
Fundamental theorem of linear programming
We conclude this chapter by showing that the S
IMPLEXprocedure works.  In par-
ticular,  any linear  program  either  is infeasible,  is unbounded,  or has an optimal
solution with a finite objective value. In each case, S
IMPLEXacts appropriately.

892Chapter 29Linear Programming
Theorem 29.13 (Fundamental theorem of linear programming)
Any linear programL, given in standard form, either
1.   has an optimal solution with a finite objective value,
2.   is infeasible, or
3.   is unbounded.
IfLis  infeasible,  S
IMPLEXreturns  “infeasible.”   IfLis unbounded,  SIMPLEX
returns “unbounded.” Otherwise, SIMPLEXreturns an optimal solution with a finite
objective value.
ProofBy Lemma 29.12, if linear programLis infeasible, then S
IMPLEXreturns
“infeasible.” Now suppose that the linear programLis feasible. By Lemma 29.12,
I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEXreturns a slack form for which the basic solution is feasible.
By  Lemma  29.7,  therefore,  S
IMPLEXeither  returns  “unbounded”  or  terminates
with a feasible solution. If it terminates with a finite solution, then Theorem 29.10
tells us that this solution is optimal.  On the other hand, if S
IMPLEXreturns “un-
bounded,” Lemma 29.2 tells us the linear programLis indeed unbounded.  Since
S
IMPLEXalways terminates in one of these ways, the proof is complete.
Exercises
29.5-1
Give detailed pseudocode to implement lines 5 and 14 of I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX.
29.5-2
Show that when the main loop of S
IMPLEXis run by INITIALIZE-SIMPLEX, it can
never return “unbounded.”
29.5-3
Suppose that we are given a linear programLin standard form, and suppose that
for bothLand the dual ofL, the basic solutions associated with the initial slack
forms are feasible. Show that the optimal objective value ofLis0.
29.5-4
Suppose  that we allow strict inequalities  in a linear program.   Show that in this
case, the fundamental theorem of linear programming does not hold.

29.5    The initial basic feasible solution893
29.5-5
Solve the following linear program using S
IMPLEX:
maximizex
1
C3x
2
subject to
x
1
x
2
8
x
1
x
2
3
x
1
C4x
2
2
x
1
;x
2
0:
29.5-6
Solve the following linear program using S
IMPLEX:
maximizex
1
2x
2
subject to
x
1
C2x
2
4
2x
1
6x
2
12
x
2
1
x
1
;x
2
0:
29.5-7
Solve the following linear program using S
IMPLEX:
maximizex
1
C3x
2
subject to
x
1
Cx
2
1
x
1
x
2
3
x
1
C4x
2
2
x
1
;x
2
0:
29.5-8
Solve the linear program given in (29.6)–(29.10).
29.5-9
Consider the following1-variable linear program, which we callP:
maximizetx
subject to
rxs
x0;
wherer,s,andtare arbitrary real numbers. LetDbe the dual ofP.

894Chapter 29Linear Programming
State for which values ofr,s,andtyou can assert that
1.   BothPandDhave optimal solutions with finite objective values.
2.Pis feasible, butDis infeasible.
3.Dis feasible, butPis infeasible.
4.   NeitherPnorDis feasible.
Problems
29-1  Linear-inequality feasibility
Given  a  set  ofmlinear  inequalities  onnvariablesx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
,thelinear-
inequality feasibility problemasks whether there is a setting of the variables that
simultaneously satisfies each of the inequalities.
a.Show that if we have an algorithm  for linear  programming,  we can use it to
solve a linear-inequality feasibility problem. The number of variables and con-
straints that you use in the linear-programming problem should be polynomial
innandm.
b.Show that if we have an algorithm for the linear-inequality feasibility problem,
we can use it to solve a linear-programming problem. The number of variables
and linear inequalities that you use in the linear-inequality feasibility problem
should be polynomial innandm, the number of variables and constraints in
the linear program.
29-2  Complementary slackness
Complementary slacknessdescribes a relationship  between the values of primal
variables  and dual constraints  and between the values of dual variables  and pri-
mal constraints.   LetNxbe a feasible solution to the primal linear program given
in (29.16)–(29.18), and letNybe a feasible solution to the dual linear program given
in (29.83)–(29.85).  Complementary slackness states that the following conditions
are necessary and sufficient forNxandNyto be optimal:
m
X
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
Dc
j
orNx
j
D0forjD1;2;:::;n
and
n
X
jD1
a
ij
Nx
j
Db
i
orNy
i
D0foriD1;2;:::;m :

Problems for Chapter 29895
a.Verify  that  complementary  slackness  holds  for  the  linear  program  in  lines
(29.53)–(29.57).
b.Prove that complementary slackness holds for any primal linear program and
its corresponding dual.
c.Prove  that  a  feasible  solutionNxto  a  primal  linear  program  given  in  lines
(29.16)–(29.18) is optimal if and only if there exist valuesNyD.Ny
1
;Ny
2
;:::;Ny
m
/
such that
1.Nyis a feasible solution to the dual linear program given in (29.83)–(29.85),
2.
P
m
iD1
a
ij
Ny
i
Dc
j
for alljsuch thatNx
j
>0,and
3.Ny
i
D0for allisuch that
P
n
jD1
a
ij
Nx
j
<b
i
.
29-3  Integer linear programming
Aninteger linear-programming problemis a linear-programming  problem with
the additional  constraint that the variablesxmust take on integral values.  Exer-
cise 34.5-3 shows that just determining whether an integer linear  program has a
feasible solution is NP-hard, which means that there is no known polynomial-time
algorithm for this problem.
a.Show that weak duality (Lemma 29.8) holds for an integer linear program.
b.Show that duality (Theorem 29.10) does not always hold for an integer linear
program.
c.Given a primal linear program in standard form, let us definePto be the opti-
mal objective value for the primal linear program,Dto be the optimal objective
value for its dual,IPto be the optimal objective value for the integer version of
the primal (that is, the primal with the added constraint that the variables take
on integer values), andIDto be the optimal objective value for the integer ver-
sion of the dual.  Assuming that both the primal integer program and the dual
integer program are feasible and bounded, show that
IPPDDID:
29-4  Farkas’s lemma
LetAbe anm	nmatrix andcbe ann-vector.  Then Farkas’s lemma states that
exactly one of the systems

896Chapter 29Linear Programming
Ax0;
c
T
x>0
and
A
T
yDc;
y0
is solvable, wherexis ann-vector andyis anm-vector. Prove Farkas’s lemma.
29-5  Minimum-cost circulation
In this problem,  we consider  a variant  of the minimum-cost-flow  problem  from
Section 29.2 in which we are not given a demand,  a source,  or a sink.   Instead,
we are given, as before, a flow network and edge costsa.u; /.  A flow is feasible
if it satisfies the capacity constraint on every edge and flow conservation atevery
vertex. The goal is to find, among all feasible flows, the one of minimum cost. We
call this problem theminimum-cost-circulation problem.
a.Formulate the minimum-cost-circulation problem as a linear program.
b.Suppose that for all edges.u; /2E,wehavea.u; / > 0.  Characterize an
optimal solution to the minimum-cost-circulation problem.
c.Formulate the maximum-flow problem as a minimum-cost-circulation problem
linear program.  That is given a maximum-flow problem instanceGD.V; E/
with sources,sinktand edge capacitiesc, create a minimum-cost-circulation
problem  by  giving  a  (possibly  different)  networkG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/with  edge
capacitiesc
0
and  edge  costsa
0
such  that  you  can  discern  a  solution  to  the
maximum-flow problem from a solution to the minimum-cost-circulation prob-
lem.
d.Formulate  the single-source  shortest-path  problem  as  a minimum-cost-circu-
lation problem linear program.
Chapter notes
This chapter only begins to study the wide field of linear programming.  A num-
ber of books are devoted  exclusively  to linear  programming,  including  those by
Chv ́atal  [69],  Gass  [130],  Karloff  [197],  Schrijver  [303],  and  Vanderbei  [344].
Many other books give a good coverage of linear programming,  including those
by  Papadimitriou  and  Steiglitz  [271]  and  Ahuja,  Magnanti,  and  Orlin  [7].   The
coverage in this chapter draws on the approach taken by Chv ́atal.

Notes for Chapter 29897
The  simplex  algorithm  for  linear  programming  was  invented  by  G.  Dantzig
in 1947. Shortly after, researchers discovered how to formulate a number of prob-
lems  in  a  variety  of  fields  as  linear  programs  and  solve  them  with  the  simplex
algorithm.  As a result, applications of linear programming flourished, along with
several  algorithms.   Variants  of  the  simplex  algorithm  remain  the  most  popular
methods for solving linear-programming problems. This history appears in a num-
ber of places, including the notes in [69] and [197].
The ellipsoid algorithm was the first polynomial-time algorithm for linear pro-
gramming and is due to L. G. Khachian in 1979; it was based on earlier work by
N. Z. Shor, D. B. Judin, and A. S. Nemirovskii.  Gr  ̈otschel, Lov ́asz, and Schrijver
[154] describe how to use the ellipsoid algorithm to solve a variety of problems in
combinatorial optimization.  To date, the ellipsoid algorithm does not appear to be
competitive with the simplex algorithm in practice.
Karmarkar’s paper [198] includes a description of the first interior-point  algo-
rithm. Many subsequent researchers designed interior-point algorithms. Good sur-
veys appear in the article of Goldfarb and Todd [141] and the book by Ye [361].
Analysis of the simplex algorithm remains an active area of research.  V. Klee
and  G.  J.  Minty  constructed  an  example  on  which  the  simplex  algorithm  runs
through2
n
1iterations.  The simplex algorithm usually performs very well in
practice and many researchers  have tried to give theoretical  justification  for this
empirical observation.  A line of research begun by K. H. Borgwardt, and carried
on by many others, shows that under certain probabilistic assumptions on the in-
put, the simplex algorithm converges in expected polynomial time.  Spielman and
Teng [322] made progress in this area, introducing the “smoothed analysis of algo-
rithms” and applying it to the simplex algorithm.
The simplex algorithm is known to run efficiently in certain special cases.  Par-
ticularly  noteworthy  is the  network-simplex  algorithm,  which  is the  simplex  al-
gorithm,  specialized  to  network-flow  problems.   For  certain  network  problems,
including  the  shortest-paths,  maximum-flow,  and  minimum-cost-flow  problems,
variants of the network-simplex algorithm run in polynomial time. See, for exam-
ple, the article by Orlin [268] and the citations therein.

30Polynomials and the FFT
The straightforward  method  of adding  two polynomials  of  degreentakes‚.n/
time, but the straightforward method of multiplying them takes‚.n
2
/time. In this
chapter, we shall show how the fast Fourier transform, or FFT, can reduce the time
to multiply polynomials to‚.nlgn/.
The most common use for Fourier transforms, and hence the FFT, is in signal
processing.  A signal is given in thetime domain:  as a function mapping time to
amplitude.  Fourier analysis allows us to express the signal as a weighted sum of
phase-shifted sinusoids of varying frequencies. The weights and phases associated
with the frequencies characterize the signal in thefrequency domain.  Among the
many everyday applications of FFT’s are compression techniques used to encode
digital video and audio information, including MP3 files. Several fine books delve
into the rich area of signal processing; the chapter notes reference a few of them.
Polynomials
Apolynomialin the variablexover an algebraic fieldFrepresents a functionA.x/
as a formal sum:
A.x/D
n1
X
jD0
a
j
x
j
:
We call  the  valuesa
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
thecoefficientsof  the  polynomial.   The co-
efficients are drawn from a fieldF, typically the setCof complex numbers.  A
polynomialA.x/hasdegreekif its highest  nonzero coefficient  isa
k
;  we write
that degree.A/Dk.  Any integer strictly greater than the degree of a polynomial
is adegree-boundof that polynomial.  Therefore,  the degree of a polynomial of
degree-boundnmay be any integer between0andn1,inclusive.
We can define a variety  of  operations  on polynomials.   Forpolynomial addi-
tion,ifA.x/andB.x/are polynomials of degree-boundn,theirsumis a polyno-

Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT899
mialC.x/, also of degree-boundn, such thatC.x/DA.x/CB.x/for allxin the
underlying field. That is, if
A.x/D
n1
X
jD0
a
j
x
j
and
B.x/D
n1
X
jD0
b
j
x
j
;
then
C.x/D
n1
X
jD0
c
j
x
j
;
wherec
j
Da
j
Cb
j
forjD0; 1; : : : ; n1.   For  example,  if  we  have  the
polynomialsA.x/D6x
3
C7x
2
10xC9andB.x/D2x
3
C4x5,then
C.x/D4x
3
C7x
2
6xC4.
Forpolynomial multiplication,ifA.x/andB.x/are polynomials  of  degree-
boundn,theirproductC.x/is a polynomial  of degree-bound2n1such that
C.x/DA.x/B.x/for allxin the underlying  field.   You probably  have multi-
plied polynomials before, by multiplying each term inA.x/by each term inB.x/
and  then  combining  terms  with  equal  powers.    For  example,  we  can  multiply
A.x/D6x
3
C7x
2
10xC9andB.x/D2x
3
C4x5as follows:
6x
3
C7x
2
10xC9
2x
3
C4x5
30x
3
35x
2
C50x45
24x
4
C28x
3
40x
2
C36x
12x
6
14x
5
C20x
4
18x
3
12x
6
14x
5
C44x
4
20x
3
75x
2
C86x45
Another way to express the productC.x/is
C.x/D
2n2
X
jD0
c
j
x
j
;(30.1)
where
c
j
D
j
X
kD0
a
k
b
jk
:(30.2)

900Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
Note that degree.C /Ddegree.A/Cdegree.B/, implying that ifAis a polyno-
mial of degree-boundn
a
andBis a polynomial of degree-boundn
b
,thenCis a
polynomial of degree-boundn
a
Cn
b
1.  Since a polynomial of degree-boundk
is also a polynomial of degree-boundkC1, we will normally say that the product
polynomialCis a polynomial of degree-boundn
a
Cn
b
.
Chapter outline
Section 30.1 presents two ways to represent polynomials: the coefficient represen-
tation and the point-value representation.  The straightforward methods for multi-
plying polynomials—equations (30.1) and (30.2)—take‚.n
2
/timewhenwerep-
resent polynomials in coefficient form, but only‚.n/time when we represent them
in point-value form.  We can, however, multiply polynomials using the coefficient
representation  in only‚.nlgn/time by converting between the two representa-
tions. To see why this approach works, we must first study complex roots of unity,
which we do in Section 30.2. Then, we use the FFT and its inverse, also described
in Section 30.2, to perform the conversions. Section 30.3 shows how to implement
the FFT quickly in both serial and parallel models.
This chapter uses complex numbers extensively, and within this chapter we use
the symboliexclusively to denote
p
1.
30.1  Representing polynomials
The coefficient and point-value representations of polynomials are in a sense equiv-
alent;  that  is,  a polynomial  in point-value  form  has a unique  counterpart  in co-
efficient  form.   In  this  section,  we  introduce  the  two  representations  and  show
how to combine them so that we can multiply two degree-boundnpolynomials
in‚.nlgn/time.
Coefficient representation
Acoefficient representationof  a  polynomialA.x/D
P
n1
jD0
a
j
x
j
of  degree-
boundnis a vector  of coefficientsaD.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/.  In matrix equations
in this chapter, we shall generally treat vectors as column vectors.
The coefficient  representation  is convenient  for  certain  operations  on polyno-
mials.  For example, the operation ofevaluatingthe polynomialA.x/at a given
pointx
0
consists of computing the value ofA.x
0
/.  We can evaluate a polynomial
in‚.n/time usingHorner’s rule:
A.x
0
/Da
0
Cx
0
.a
1
Cx
0
.a
2
CCx
0
.a
n2
Cx
0
.a
n1
//// :

30.1Representing polynomials901
Similarly,  adding  two  polynomials  represented  by  the  coefficient  vectorsaD
.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/andbD.b
0
;b
1
;:::;b
n1
/takes‚.n/time:  we just produce
the  coefficient  vectorcD.c
0
;c
1
;:::;c
n1
/,wherec
j
Da
j
Cb
j
forjD
0; 1; : : : ; n1.
Now, consider multiplying two degree-boundnpolynomialsA.x/andB.x/rep-
resented in coefficient form.  If we use the method described by equations (30.1)
and  (30.2),  multiplying  polynomials  takes  time‚.n
2
/,  since  we  must  multiply
each coefficient in the vectoraby each coefficient in the vectorb.  The operation
of multiplying polynomials in coefficient form seems to be considerably more diffi-
cult than that of evaluating a polynomial or adding two polynomials. The resulting
coefficient vectorc, given by equation (30.2), is also called theconvolutionof the
input vectorsaandb, denotedcDa ̋b.  Since multiplying  polynomials and
computing convolutions are fundamental computational problems of considerable
practical importance, this chapter concentrates on efficient algorithms for them.
Point-value representation
Apoint-value representationof a polynomialA.x/of degree-boundnis a set of
npoint-value pairs
f
.x
0
;y
0
/; .x
1
;y
1
/;:::;.x
n1
;y
n1
/
g
such that all of thex
k
are distinct and
y
k
DA.x
k
/(30.3)
forkD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  A polynomial has many different point-value representa-
tions, since we can use any set ofndistinct pointsx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
as a basis for
the representation.
Computing  a  point-value  representation  for  a  polynomial  given  in  coefficient
form  is  in principle  straightforward,  since  all  we have  to do  is selectndistinct
pointsx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
andthenevaluateA.x
k
/forkD0; 1; : : : ; n1.   With
Horner’s method, evaluating a polynomial atnpoints takes time‚.n
2
/.Weshall
see later that if we choose the pointsx
k
cleverly, we can accelerate this computation
to run in time‚.nlgn/.
The  inverse  of  evaluation—determining  the  coefficient  form  of  a  polynomial
from a point-value representation—isinterpolation. The following theorem shows
that interpolation is well defined when the desired interpolating polynomial must
have a degree-bound equal to the given number of point-value pairs.
Theorem 30.1 (Uniqueness of an interpolating polynomial)
For any set
f
.x
0
;y
0
/; .x
1
;y
1
/;:::;.x
n1
;y
n1
/
g
ofnpoint-value  pairs such that
all thex
k
values are distinct, there is a unique polynomialA.x/of degree-boundn
such thaty
k
DA.x
k
/forkD0; 1; : : : ; n1.

902Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
ProofThe proof relies on the existence of the inverse of a certain matrix.  Equa-
tion (30.3) is equivalent to the matrix equation
 ̇
1x
0
x
2
0
x
n1
0
1x
1
x
2
1
x
n1
1
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
1x
n1
x
2
n1
x
n1
n1
 ̇
a
0
a
1
:
:
:
a
n1

D
 ̇
y
0
y
1
:
:
:
y
n1

:(30.4)
The matrix on the left is denotedV.x
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
/and is known as a Vander-
monde matrix. By Problem D-1, this matrix has determinant
Y
0j<kn1
.x
k
x
j
/;
and therefore, by Theorem D.5, it is invertible (that is, nonsingular) if thex
k
are
distinct.  Thus, we can solve for the coefficientsa
j
uniquely given the point-value
representation:
aDV.x
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
/
1
y:
The proof  of Theorem 30.1 describes  an algorithm  for interpolation  based on
solving the set (30.4) of linear equations. Using the LU decomposition algorithms
of Chapter 28, we can solve these equations in timeO.n
3
/.
A faster algorithm forn-point interpolation is based onLagrange’s formula:
A.x/D
n1
X
kD0
y
k
Y
j¤k
.xx
j
/
Y
j¤k
.x
k
x
j
/
:(30.5)
You may wish to verify that the right-hand side of equation (30.5) is a polynomial
of degree-boundnthat satisfiesA.x
k
/Dy
k
for allk.  Exercise 30.1-5 asks you
how to compute the coefficients ofAusing Lagrange’s formula in time‚.n
2
/.
Thus,n-point  evaluation and interpolation  are well-defined inverse operations
that transform between the coefficient representation of a polynomial and a point-
value  representation.
1
The  algorithms  described  above  for  these  problems  take
time‚.n
2
/.
The point-value representation is quite convenient for many operations on poly-
nomials. For addition, ifC.x/DA.x/CB.x/,thenC.x
k
/DA.x
k
/CB.x
k
/for
any pointx
k
. More precisely, if we have a point-value representation forA,
1
Interpolation is a notoriously tricky problem from the point of view of numerical stability. Although
the approaches described here are mathematically correct, small differences in the inputs or round-off
errors during computation can cause large differences in the result.

30.1Representing polynomials903
f
.x
0
;y
0
/; .x
1
;y
1
/;:::;.x
n1
;y
n1
/
g
;
and forB,
f
.x
0
;y
0
0
/; .x
1
;y
0
1
/;:::;.x
n1
;y
0
n1
/
g
(note thatAandBare evaluated at thesamenpoints), then a point-value repre-
sentation forCis
f
.x
0
;y
0
Cy
0
0
/; .x
1
;y
1
Cy
0
1
/;:::;.x
n1
;y
n1
Cy
0
n1
/
g
:
Thus,  the  time  to  add  two  polynomials  of  degree-boundnin  point-value  form
is‚.n/.
Similarly, the point-value representation is convenient for multiplying polyno-
mials.  IfC.x/DA.x/B.x/,thenC.x
k
/DA.x
k
/B.x
k
/for any pointx
k
,and
we can pointwise multiply a point-value representation forAby a point-value rep-
resentation forBto obtain a point-value representation forC.  We must face the
problem, however, that degree.C /Ddegree.A/Cdegree.B/;ifAandBare of
degree-boundn,thenCis of degree-bound2n.  A standard point-value represen-
tation forAandBconsists ofnpoint-value pairs for each polynomial.  When we
multiply these together, we getnpoint-value pairs, but we need2npairs to interpo-
late a unique polynomialCof degree-bound2n.  (See Exercise 30.1-4.)  We must
therefore begin with “extended” point-value representations forAand forBcon-
sisting of2npoint-value pairs each. Given an extended point-value representation
forA,
f
.x
0
;y
0
/; .x
1
;y
1
/;:::;.x
2n1
;y
2n1
/
g
;
and a corresponding extended point-value representation forB,
f
.x
0
;y
0
0
/; .x
1
;y
0
1
/;:::;.x
2n1
;y
0
2n1
/
g
;
then a point-value representation forCis
f
.x
0
;y
0
y
0
0
/; .x
1
;y
1
y
0
1
/;:::;.x
2n1
;y
2n1
y
0
2n1
/
g
:
Given two input polynomials in extended point-value form, we see that the time to
multiply them to obtain the point-value form of the result is‚.n/, much less than
the time required to multiply polynomials in coefficient form.
Finally, we consider how to evaluate a polynomial given in point-value form at a
new point. For this problem, we know of no simpler approach than converting the
polynomial to coefficient form first, and then evaluating it at the new point.
Fast multiplication of polynomials in coefficient form
Can we use the linear-time multiplication method for polynomials in point-value
form to expedite polynomial multiplication in coefficient form? The answer hinges

904Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
b
0
;b
1
;:::;b
n1
c
0
;c
1
;:::;c
2n2
Ordinary multiplication
Time‚.n
2
/
Evaluation
Time‚.nlgn/Time‚.nlgn/
Interpolation
Pointwise multiplication
Time‚.n/
A.!
0
2n
/; B.!
0
2n
/
A.!
1
2n
/; B.!
1
2n
/
A.!
2n1
2n
/; B.!
2n1
2n
/
:
:
:
:
:
:
C.!
0
2n
/
C.!
1
2n
/
C.!
2n1
2n
/
Coefficient
Point-value
representations
representations
Figure 30.1A graphical outline of an efficient polynomial-multiplication process. Representations
on the top are in coefficient form, while those on the bottom are in point-value form.  The arrows
from left to right correspond to the multiplication operation. The!
2n
terms are complex.2n/th roots
of unity.
on whether we can convert a polynomial quickly from coefficient form to point-
value form (evaluate) and vice versa (interpolate).
We can use any points we want as evaluation points, but by choosing the eval-
uation points carefully, we can convert between representations in only‚.nlgn/
time.  As we shall see in Section 30.2, if we choose “complex roots of unity” as
the evaluation points,  we can produce a point-value representation  by taking the
discrete Fourier transform  (or DFT) of a coefficient vector.  We can perform the
inverse operation, interpolation, by taking the “inverse DFT” of point-value pairs,
yielding a coefficient vector.  Section 30.2 will show how the FFT accomplishes
the DFT and inverse DFT operations in‚.nlgn/time.
Figure 30.1 shows this strategy graphically.  One minor detail concerns degree-
bounds.   The product  of two polynomials  of degree-boundnis a polynomial  of
degree-bound2n.   Before evaluating  the input  polynomialsAandB,  therefore,
we first double their degree-bounds to2nby addingnhigh-order coefficients of0.
Because the vectors have2nelements,  we use “complex.2n/th roots of unity,”
which are denoted by the!
2n
terms in Figure 30.1.
Given the FFT, we have the following‚.nlgn/-time procedure for multiplying
two polynomialsA.x/andB.x/of degree-boundn, where the input and output
representations are in coefficient form.  We assume thatnisapowerof2; we can
always meet this requirement by adding high-order zero coefficients.
1.Double degree-bound:Create coefficient representations ofA.x/andB.x/as
degree-bound2npolynomials by addingnhigh-order zero coefficients to each.

30.1Representing polynomials905
2.Evaluate:Compute point-value representations ofA.x/andB.x/of length2n
by applying the FFT of order2non each polynomial.  These representations
contain the values of the two polynomials at the.2n/th roots of unity.
3.Pointwise multiply:Compute a point-value representation  for the polynomial
C.x/DA.x/B.x/by multiplying these values together pointwise. This repre-
sentation contains the value ofC.x/at each.2n/th root of unity.
4.Interpolate:Create the coefficient  representation  of the polynomialC.x/by
applying the FFT on2npoint-value pairs to compute the inverse DFT.
Steps (1) and (3) take time‚.n/, and steps (2) and (4) take time‚.nlgn/.  Thus,
once we show how to use the FFT, we will have proven the following.
Theorem 30.2
We can multiply two polynomials of degree-boundnin time‚.nlgn/, with both
the input and output representations in coefficient form.
Exercises
30.1-1
Multiply the polynomialsA.x/D7x
3
x
2
Cx10andB.x/D8x
3
6xC3
using equations (30.1) and (30.2).
30.1-2
Another way to evaluate a polynomialA.x/of degree-boundnat a given pointx
0
is to divideA.x/by the polynomial.xx
0
/, obtaining a quotient polynomialq.x/
of degree-boundn1and a remainderr, such that
A.x/Dq.x/.xx
0
/Cr:
Clearly,A.x
0
/Dr.  Show how to compute the remainderrand the coefficients
ofq.x/in time‚.n/fromx
0
and the coefficients ofA.
30.1-3
Derive a point-value representation forA
rev
.x/D
P
n1
jD0
a
n1j
x
j
from a point-
value representation forA.x/D
P
n1
jD0
a
j
x
j
, assuming that none of the points is0.
30.1-4
Prove thatndistinct point-value pairs are necessary to uniquely specify a polyno-
mial of degree-boundn, that is, if fewer thanndistinct point-value pairs are given,
they fail to specify a unique polynomial of degree-boundn.(Hint:Using Theo-
rem 30.1, what can you say about a set ofn1point-value pairs to which you add
one more arbitraril
ychosenpoint-valuepair?)

906Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
30.1-5
Show how to use equation (30.5) to interpolate in time‚.n
2
/.(Hint:First compute
the coefficient  representation  of the polynomial
Q
j
.xx
j
/andthendivideby
.xx
k
/as necessary for the numerator of each term; see Exercise 30.1-2. You can
compute each of thendenominators in timeO.n/.)
30.1-6
Explain what is wrong with the “obvious” approach to polynomial division using
a  point-value  representation,  i.e.,  dividing  the  correspondingyvalues.   Discuss
separately the case in which the division comes out exactly and the case in which
it doesn’t.
30.1-7
Consider two setsAandB, each havingnintegers in the range from0to10n.We
wish to compute theCartesian sumofAandB,definedby
CD
f
xCyWx2Aandy2B
g
:
Note that the integers inCare in the range from0to20n.Wewanttofindthe
elements ofCand the number of times each element ofCis realized as a sum of
elements inAandB.  Show how to solve the problem inO.nlgn/time.  (Hint:
RepresentAandBas polynomials of degree at most10n.)
30.2  The DFT and FFT
In Section 30.1, we claimed that if we use complex roots of unity, we can evaluate
and interpolate polynomials in‚.nlgn/time.  In this section, we define complex
roots of unity and study their properties, define the DFT, and then show how the
FFT computes the DFT and its inverse in‚.nlgn/time.
Complex roots of unity
Acomplexnth root of unityis a complex number!such that
!
n
D1:
There are exactlyncomplexnth roots of unity:e
2 i k=n
forkD0; 1; : : : ; n1.
To interpret  this formula,  we use the definition  of the exponential  of a complex
number:
e
iu
Dcos.u/Cisin.u/ :
Figure 30.2 shows that thencomplex roots of unity are equally spaced around the
circle of unit radius centered at the origin of the complex plane. The value

30.2The DFT and FFT907
11
i
i
!
0
8
D!
8
8
!
1
8
!
2
8
!
3
8
!
4
8
!
5
8
!
6
8
!
7
8
Figure 30.2The values of!
0
8
;!
1
8
;:::;!
7
8
in the complex plane, where!
8
De
2 i=8
is the prin-
cipal8th root of unity.
!
n
De
2 i=n
(30.6)
is theprincipalnth root of unity;
2
all other complexnth roots of unity are powers
of!
n
.
Thencomplexnth roots of unity,
!
0
n
;!
1
n
;:::;!
n1
n
;
form a group  under  multiplication  (see Section 31.3).   This group  has the same
structure as the additive group.Z
n
;C/modulon,since!
n
n
D!
0
n
D1implies that
!
j
n
!
k
n
D!
jCk
n
D!
.jCk/modn
n
.  Similarly,!
1
n
D!
n1
n
.  The following lemmas
furnish some essential properties of the complexnth roots of unity.
Lemma 30.3 (Cancellation lemma)
For any integersn0,k0,andd>0,
!
dk
dn
D!
k
n
:(30.7)
ProofThe lemma follows directly from equation (30.6), since
!
dk
dn
D

e
2 i=d n

dk
D

e
2 i=n

k
D!
k
n
:
2
Many other authors define!
n
differently:!
n
De
2 i=n
.  This alternative definition tends to be
used for signal-processing applications.  The underlying mathematics is substantially the same with
either definition of!
n
.

908Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
Corollary 30.4
For any even integern>0,
!
n=2
n
D!
2
D1:
ProofThe proof is left as Exercise 30.2-1.
Lemma 30.5 (Halving lemma)
Ifn>0is even, then the squares of thencomplexnth roots of unity are then=2
complex.n=2/th roots of unity.
ProofBy the cancellation lemma, we have.!
k
n
/
2
D!
k
n=2
, for any nonnegative
integerk.  Note that if we square all of the complexnth roots of unity,  then we
obtain each.n=2/th root of unity exactly twice, since
.!
kCn=2
n
/
2
D!
2kCn
n
D!
2k
n
!
n
n
D!
2k
n
D.!
k
n
/
2
:
Thus,!
k
n
and!
kCn=2
n
have  the  same  square.   We  could  also  have  used  Corol-
lary 30.4 to prove this property,  since!
n=2
n
D1implies!
kCn=2
n
D!
k
n
,and
thus.!
kCn=2
n
/
2
D.!
k
n
/
2
.
As we shall see, the halving lemma is essential to our divide-and-conquer  ap-
proach for converting between coefficient and point-value representations of poly-
nomials, since it guarantees that the recursive subproblems are only half as large.
Lemma 30.6 (Summation lemma)
For any integern1and nonzero integerknot divisible byn,
n1
X
jD0

!
k
n

j
D0:
ProofEquation (A.5) applies to complex values as well as to reals,  and so we
have

30.2The DFT and FFT909
n1
X
jD0

!
k
n

j
D
.!
k
n
/
n
1
!
k
n
1
D
.!
n
n
/
k
1
!
k
n
1
D
.1/
k
1
!
k
n
1
D0:
Because we require thatkis not divisible byn, and because!
k
n
D1only whenk
is divisible byn, we ensure that the denominator is not0.
The DFT
Recall that we wish to evaluate a polynomial
A.x/D
n1
X
jD0
a
j
x
j
of degree-boundnat!
0
n
;!
1
n
;!
2
n
;:::;!
n1
n
(that is, at thencomplexnth roots of
unity).
3
We assume thatAis given in coefficient form:aD.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/.Let
us define the resultsy
k
,forkD0; 1; : : : ; n1,by
y
k
DA.!
k
n
/
D
n1
X
jD0
a
j
!
kj
n
:(30.8)
The vectoryD.y
0
;y
1
;:::;y
n1
/is thediscrete Fourier transform (DFT)of the
coefficient vectoraD.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/. We also writeyDDFT
n
.a/.
The FFT
By using a method known as thefast Fourier transform (FFT), which takes ad-
vantage of the special properties of the complex roots of unity,  we can compute
DFT
n
.a/in time‚.nlgn/, as opposed to the‚.n
2
/time of the straightforward
method. We assume throughout thatnis an exact power of2. Although strategies
3
The lengthnis actually what we referred to as2nin Section 30.1, since we double the degree-bound
of the given polynomials prior to evaluation.  In the context of polynomial multiplication, therefore,
we are actually working with complex.2n/th roots of unity.

910Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
for dealing with non-power-of-2sizes are known, they are beyond the scope of this
book.
The FFT method employs a divide-and-conquer strategy, using the even-indexed
and odd-indexed coefficients ofA.x/separately to define the two new polynomials
A
Œ0
.x/andA
Œ1
.x/of degree-boundn=2:
A
Œ0
.x/Da
0
Ca
2
xCa
4
x
2
CCa
n2
x
n=21
;
A
Œ1
.x/Da
1
Ca
3
xCa
5
x
2
CCa
n1
x
n=21
:
Note thatA
Œ0
contains all the even-indexed coefficients ofA(the binary represen-
tation of the index ends in0)andA
Œ1
contains all the odd-indexed coefficients (the
binary representation of the index ends in1). It follows that
A.x/DA
Œ0
.x
2
/CxA
Œ1
.x
2
/;(30.9)
so that the problem of evaluatingA.x/at!
0
n
;!
1
n
;:::;!
n1
n
reduces to
1.   evaluating the degree-boundn=2polynomialsA
Œ0
.x/andA
Œ1
.x/at the points
.!
0
n
/
2
;.!
1
n
/
2
;:::;.!
n1
n
/
2
;(30.10)
and then
2.   combining the results according to equation (30.9).
By the halving lemma, the list of values (30.10) consists not ofndistinct val-
ues but only of then=2complex.n=2/th roots of unity, with each root occurring
exactly twice.  Therefore,  we recursively  evaluate the polynomialsA
Œ0
andA
Œ1
of degree-boundn=2at then=2complex.n=2/th roots of unity.  These subprob-
lems  have  exactly  the  same form  as the  original  problem,  but  are  half  the  size.
We have now successfully divided ann-element DFT
n
computation into twon=2-
element  DFT
n=2
computations.   This  decomposition  is  the  basis  for  the  follow-
ing  recursive  FFT  algorithm,  which  computes  the  DFT  of  ann-element  vector
aD.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/,wherenis a power of2.

30.2The DFT and FFT911
RECURSIVE-FFT.a/
1nDa:length//nis a power of2
2ifn
==1
3returna
4!
n
De
2 i=n
5!D1
6a
Œ0
D.a
0
;a
2
;:::;a
n2
/
7a
Œ1
D.a
1
;a
3
;:::;a
n1
/
8y
Œ0
DRECURSIVE-FFT.a
Œ0
/
9y
Œ1
DRECURSIVE-FFT.a
Œ1
/
10forkD0ton=21
11y
k
Dy
Œ0
k
C!y
Œ1
k
12y
kC.n=2/
Dy
Œ0
k
!y
Œ1
k
13!D!!
n
14returny//yis assumed to be a column vector
The R
ECURSIVE-FFT procedure works as follows.  Lines 2–3 represent the basis
of the recursion; the DFT of one element is the element itself, since in this case
y
0
Da
0
!
0
1
Da
0
1
Da
0
:
Lines 6–7 define the coefficient vectors for the polynomialsA
Œ0
andA
Œ1
.Lines
4,  5,  and 13 guarantee  that!is updated properly  so that  whenever lines 11–12
are executed,  we have!D!
k
n
.   (Keeping  a running  value  of!from  iteration
to iteration saves time over computing!
k
n
from scratch each time through thefor
loop.)   Lines 8–9  perform  the  recursive  DFT
n=2
computations,  setting,  forkD
0; 1; : : : ; n=21,
y
Œ0
k
DA
Œ0
.!
k
n=2
/;
y
Œ1
k
DA
Œ1
.!
k
n=2
/;
or, since!
k
n=2
D!
2k
n
by the cancellation lemma,
y
Œ0
k
DA
Œ0
.!
2k
n
/;
y
Œ1
k
DA
Œ1
.!
2k
n
/:

912Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
Lines 11–12 combine the results of the recursive DFT
n=2
calculations.  Fory
0
;y
1
;
:::;y
n=21
, line 11 yields
y
k
Dy
Œ0
k
C!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
DA
Œ0
.!
2k
n
/C!
k
n
A
Œ1
.!
2k
n
/
DA.!
k
n
/(by equation (30.9)) .
Fory
n=2
;y
n=2C1
;:::;y
n1
, lettingkD0; 1; : : : ; n=21, line 12 yields
y
kC.n=2/
Dy
Œ0
k
!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
Dy
Œ0
k
C!
kC.n=2/
n
y
Œ1
k
(since!
kC.n=2/
n
D!
k
n
)
DA
Œ0
.!
2k
n
/C!
kC.n=2/
n
A
Œ1
.!
2k
n
/
DA
Œ0
.!
2kCn
n
/C!
kC.n=2/
n
A
Œ1
.!
2kCn
n
/(since!
2kCn
n
D!
2k
n
)
DA.!
kC.n=2/
n
/(by equation (30.9))  .
Thus, the vectoryreturned by R
ECURSIVE-FFT  is indeed the DFT of the input
vectora.
Lines 11  and 12 multiply  each  valuey
Œ1
k
by!
k
n
,forkD0; 1; : : : ; n=21.
Line 11 adds this product toy
Œ0
k
, and line 12 subtracts it.  Because we use each
factor!
k
n
in both its positive and negative forms,  we call the factors!
k
n
twiddle
factors.
To  determine  the  running  time  of  procedure  R
ECURSIVE-FFT,  we  note  that
exclusive of the recursive calls, each invocation takes time‚.n/,wherenis the
length of the input vector. The recurrence for the running time is therefore
T .n/D2T .n=2/C‚.n/
D‚.nlgn/ :
Thus, we can evaluate a polynomial of degree-boundnat the complexnth roots of
unity in time‚.nlgn/using the fast Fourier transform.
Interpolation at the complex roots of unity
We now complete  the polynomial  multiplication  scheme by showing how to in-
terpolate the complex roots of unity by a polynomial, which enables us to convert
from point-value form back to coefficient form. We interpolate by writing the DFT
as a matrix equation and then looking at the form of the matrix inverse.
From equation (30.4), we can write the DFT as the matrix productyDV
n
a,
whereV
n
is a Vandermonde matrix containing the appropriate powers of!
n
:

30.2The DFT and FFT913

y
0
y
1
y
2
y
3
:
:
:
y
n1

D

11111
1!
n
!
2
n
!
3
n
!
n1
n
1!
2
n
!
4
n
!
6
n
!
2.n1/
n
1!
3
n
!
6
n
!
9
n
!
3.n1/
n
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
1!
n1
n
!
2.n1/
n
!
3.n1/
n
!
.n1/.n1/
n

a
0
a
1
a
2
a
3
:
:
:
a
n1

:
The.k; j /entry ofV
n
is!
kj
n
,forj; kD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  The exponents of the
entries ofV
n
form a multiplication table.
For the inverse operation,  which we write asaDDFT
1
n
.y/, we proceed  by
multiplyingyby the matrixV
1
n
, the inverse ofV
n
.
Theorem 30.7
Forj; kD0; 1; : : : ; n1,the.j; k/entry ofV
1
n
is!
kj
n
=n.
ProofWe show thatV
1
n
V
n
DI
n
,then	nidentity matrix. Consider the.j; j
0
/
entry ofV
1
n
V
n
:
ŒV
1
n
V
n

jj
0
D
n1
X
kD0
.!
kj
n
=n/.!
kj
0
n
/
D
n1
X
kD0
!
k.j
0
j/
n
=n :
This summation equals1ifj
0
Dj, and it is0otherwise by the summation lemma
(Lemma 30.6). Note that we rely on.n1/j
0
jn1,sothatj
0
jis
not divisible byn, in order for the summation lemma to apply.
Given the inverse matrixV
1
n
,wehavethatDFT
1
n
.y/is given by
a
j
D
1
n
n1
X
kD0
y
k
!
kj
n
(30.11)
forjD0; 1; : : : ; n1.  By comparing equations (30.8) and (30.11), we see that
by modifying the FFT algorithm to switch the roles ofaandy, replace!
n
by!
1
n
,
and divide each element of the result byn, we compute the inverse DFT (see Ex-
ercise 30.2-4). Thus, we can compute DFT
1
n
in‚.nlgn/time as well.
We see that,  by using the FFT and the inverse FFT, we can transform a poly-
nomial  of  degree-boundnback  and  forth  between  its  coefficient  representation
and a point-value representation  in time‚.nlgn/.  In the context of polynomial
multiplication, we have shown the following.

914Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
Theorem 30.8 (Convolution theorem)
For any two vectorsaandbof lengthn,wherenisapowerof2,
a ̋bDDFT
1
2n
.DFT
2n
.a/DFT
2n
.b// ;
where the vectorsaandbare padded with0s to length2nanddenotes the com-
ponentwise product of two2n-element vectors.
Exercises
30.2-1
Prove Corollary 30.4.
30.2-2
Compute the DFT of the vector.0;1;2;3/.
30.2-3
Do Exercise 30.1-1 by using the‚.nlgn/-time scheme.
30.2-4
Write pseudocode to compute DFT
1
n
in‚.nlgn/time.
30.2-5
Describe the generalization of the FFT procedure to the case in whichnisapower
of3. Give a recurrence for the running time, and solve the recurrence.
30.2-6?
Suppose that instead of performing ann-element FFT over the field of complex
numbers  (wherenis  even),  we  use  the  ringZ
m
of  integers  modulom,where
mD2
tn=2
C1andtis an arbitrary positive integer.  Use!D2
t
instead of!
n
as a principalnth root of unity, modulom. Prove that the DFT and the inverse DFT
are well defined in this system.
30.2-7
Givenalistofvalues ́
0
; ́
1
;:::; ́
n1
(possibly with repetitions), show how to find
the coefficients of a polynomialP.x/of degree-boundnC1that has zeros only
at ́
0
; ́
1
;:::; ́
n1
(possibly with repetitions).  Your procedure should run in time
O.nlg
2
n/.(Hint:The polynomialP.x/has a zero at ́
j
if and only ifP.x/is a
multiple of.x ́
j
/.)
30.2-8?
Thechirp transformof  a  vectoraD.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/is  the  vectoryD
.y
0
;y
1
;:::;y
n1
/,wherey
k
D
P
n1
jD0
a
j
 ́
kj
and ́is any complex number.  The

30.3Efficient FFT implementations915
DFT is therefore a special case of the chirp transform, obtained by taking ́D!
n
.
Show how to evaluate the chirp transform in timeO.nlgn/for any complex num-
ber ́.(Hint:Use the equation
y
k
D ́
k
2
=2
n1
X
jD0

a
j
 ́
j
2
=2

 ́
.kj/
2
=2

to view the chirp transform as a convolution.)
30.3  Efficient FFT implementations
Since the practical applications of the DFT, such as signal processing, demand the
utmost speed, this section examines two efficient FFT implementations.  First, we
shall examine an iterative version of the FFT algorithm that runs in‚.nlgn/time
but can have a lower constant hidden in the‚-notation than the recursive version
in Section 30.2.  (Depending  on the exact implementation,  the recursive version
may use the hardware cache more efficiently.)  Then, we shall use the insights that
led us to the iterative implementation to design an efficient parallel FFT circuit.
An iterative FFT implementation
We first note that theforloop of lines 10–13 of R
ECURSIVE-FFT  involves com-
puting the value!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
twice.  In compiler terminology,  we call such a value a
common subexpression.  We can change the loop to compute it only once, storing
it in a temporary variablet.
forkD0ton=21
tD!y
Œ1
k
y
k
Dy
Œ0
k
Ct
y
kC.n=2/
Dy
Œ0
k
t
!D!!
n
The operation in this loop, multiplying the twiddle factor!D!
k
n
byy
Œ1
k
, storing
the product intot, and adding and subtractingtfromy
Œ0
k
, is known as abutterfly
operationand is shown schematically in Figure 30.3.
We now  show  how to make  the FFT algorithm  iterative  rather  than  recursive
in structure.  In Figure 30.4,  we have arranged the input vectors to the recursive
calls  in  an  invocation  of  R
ECURSIVE-FFT  in  a tree  structure,  where  the  initial
call is fornD8.  The tree has one node for each call of the procedure,  labeled

916Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
+
–
•
(a)(b)
y
Œ0
k
y
Œ0
k
y
Œ1
k
y
Œ1
k
!
k
n
!
k
n
y
Œ0
k
C!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
y
Œ0
k
C!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
y
Œ0
k
!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
y
Œ0
k
!
k
n
y
Œ1
k
Figure 30.3A butterfly operation.(a)The two input values enter from the left, the twiddle fac-
tor!
k
n
is multiplied byy
Œ1
k
, and the sum and difference are output on the right.(b)Asimplified
drawing of a butterfly operation. We will use this representation in a parallel FFT circuit.
(a
0
,a
1
,a
2
,a
3
,a
4
,a
5
,a
6
,a
7
)
(a
0
,a
2
,a
4
,a
6
)
(a
0
,a
4
)(a
2
,a
6
)
(a
0
)(a
4
)(a
2
)(a
6
)
(a
1
,a
3
,a
5
,a
7
)
(a
1
,a
5
)
(a
1
)(a
5
)
(a
3
,a
7
)
(a
3
)(a
7
)
Figure 30.4The tree of input vectors to the recursive calls of the RECURSIVE-FFT procedure. The
initial invocation is fornD8.
by the corresponding input vector.  Each RECURSIVE-FFT invocation makes two
recursive calls, unless it has received a1-element vector.  The first call appears in
the left child, and the second call appears in the right child.
Looking  at  the  tree,  we observe  that  if  we could  arrange  the  elements  of  the
initial vectorainto the order in which they appear in the leaves, we could trace
the  execution  of  the  R
ECURSIVE-FFT  procedure,  but  bottom  up  instead  of  top
down.  First, we take the elements in pairs, compute the DFT of each pair using
one butterfly operation, and replace the pair with its DFT.  The vector then holds
n=2 2-element  DFTs.   Next,  we take thesen=2DFTs in pairs  and compute  the
DFT of the four vector elements they come from by executing two butterfly oper-
ations, replacing two2-element DFTs with one4-element DFT.  The vector then
holdsn=4 4-element DFTs. We continue in this manner until the vector holds two
.n=2/-element DFTs, which we combine usingn=2butterfly operations  into the
finaln-element DFT.
To turn this bottom-up approach into code,  we use an arrayAŒ0 : : n1that
initially holds the elements of the input vectorain the order in which they appear

30.3Efficient FFT implementations917
in the leaves of the tree of Figure 30.4. (We shall show later how to determine this
order, which is known as a bit-reversal permutation.) Because we have to combine
DFTs on each level of the tree, we introduce a variablesto count the levels, ranging
from1(at  the  bottom,  when  we  are  combining  pairs  to  form2-element  DFTs)
to lgn(at the top, when we are combining two.n=2/-element DFTs to produce the
final result). The algorithm therefore has the following structure:
1forsD1tolgn
2forkD0ton1by2
s
3combine the two2
s1
-element DFTs in
AŒk : : kC2
s1
1andAŒkC2
s1
::kC2
s
1
into one2
s
-element DFT inAŒk : : kC2
s
1
We can  express  the  body  of  the  loop  (line  3)  as more  precise  pseudocode.   We
copy  theforloop  from  the  R
ECURSIVE-FFT  procedure,  identifyingy
Œ0
with
AŒk : : kC2
s1
1andy
Œ1
withAŒkC2
s1
::kC2
s
1.  The twiddle fac-
tor used in each butterfly operation depends on the value ofs;itisapowerof!
m
,
wheremD2
s
.  (We introduce the variablemsolely for the sake of readability.)
We introduce another temporary variableuthat allows us to perform the butterfly
operation  in place.   When we replace line 3 of the overall  structure  by the loop
body, we get the following pseudocode, which forms the basis of the parallel im-
plementation  we shall  present  later.   The code first calls the auxiliary  procedure
B
IT-REVERSE-COPY.a; A/to copy  vectorainto arrayAin the initial  order  in
which we need the values.
I
TERATIVE-FFT.a/
1B
IT-REVERSE-COPY.a; A/
2nDa:length//nis a power of2
3forsD1tolgn
4mD2
s
5!
m
De
2 i=m
6forkD0ton1bym
7!D1
8forjD0tom=21
9tD! AŒkCjCm=2
10uDAŒkCj
11AŒkCjDuCt
12AŒkCjCm=2Dut
13!D!!
m
14returnA
How does B
IT-REVERSE-COPYget the elements of the input vectorainto the
desired order in the arrayA?  The order in which the leaves appear in Figure 30.4

918Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
is  abit-reversal permutation.   That  is,  if  we  let  rev.k/be  the  lgn-bit  integer
formed  by reversing  the bits  of the binary  representation  ofk,thenwewantto
place  vector  elementa
k
in  array  positionAŒrev.k/.   In  Figure  30.4,  for  exam-
ple,  the leaves  appear  in the order0; 4; 2; 6; 1; 5; 3; 7;  this sequence  in binary is
000; 100; 010; 110; 001; 101; 011; 111, and when we reverse the bits of each value
we get the sequence000; 001; 010; 011; 100; 101; 110; 111.  To see that we want a
bit-reversal permutation in general, we note that at the top level of the tree, indices
whose low-order bit is0go into the left subtree and indices whose low-order bit
is1go into the right subtree. Stripping off the low-order bit at each level, we con-
tinue this process down the tree,  until we get the order given by the bit-reversal
permutation at the leaves.
Since we can easily compute the function rev.k/,theB
IT-REVERSE-COPYpro-
cedure is simple:
B
IT-REVERSE-COPY.a; A/
1nDa:length
2forkD0ton1
3AŒrev.k/Da
k
The  iterative  FFT  implementation  runs  in  time‚.nlgn/.   The  call  to  BIT-
R
EVERSE-COPY.a; A/certainly runs inO.nlgn/time, since we iteratentimes
and can reverse an integer between 0 andn1, with lgnbits,  inO.lgn/time.
(In practice, because we usually know the initial value ofnin advance, we would
probably code a table mappingkto rev.k/,makingB
IT-REVERSE-COPYrun in
‚.n/time with a low hidden constant. Alternatively, we could use the clever amor-
tized reverse binary counter scheme described in Problem 17-1.)  To complete the
proof that I
TERATIVE-FFT runs in time‚.nlgn/, we show thatL.n/, the number
of times the body of the innermost loop (lines 8–13) executes, is‚.nlgn/.The
forloop of  lines 6–13  iteratesn=mDn=2
s
times for each value  ofs,andthe
innermost loop of lines 8–13 iteratesm=2D2
s1
times. Thus,
L.n/D
lgn
X
sD1
n
2
s
2
s1
D
lgn
X
sD1
n
2
D‚.nlgn/ :

30.3Efficient FFT implementations919
a
0
a
1
a
2
a
3
a
4
a
5
a
6
a
7
y
0
y
1
y
2
y
3
y
4
y
5
y
6
y
7
stagesD1stagesD2stagesD3
!
0
2
!
0
2
!
0
2
!
0
2
!
0
4
!
0
4
!
1
4
!
1
4
!
0
8
!
1
8
!
2
8
!
3
8
Figure 30.5A  circuit  that  computes  the  FFT  in  parallel,  here  shown  onnD8inputs.   Each
butterfly operation takes as input the values on two wires, along with a twiddle factor, and it produces
as outputs the values on two wires.  The stages of butterflies are labeled to correspond to iterations
of the outermost loop of the  I
TERATIVE-FFT procedure.  Only the top and bottom wires passing
through a butterfly interact with it;  wires that pass through the middle of a butterfly do not affect
that butterfly, nor are their values changed by that butterfly. For example, the top butterfly in stage2
has nothing to do with wire1(the wire whose output is labeledy
1
); its inputs and outputs are only
on wires0and2(labeledy
0
andy
2
,  respectively).   This circuit has depth‚.lgn/and performs
‚.nlgn/butterfly operations altogether.
A parallel FFT circuit
We can exploit many of the properties that allowed us to implement an efficient
iterative FFT algorithm to produce an efficient parallel algorithm for the FFT. We
will express the parallel FFT algorithm as a circuit.  Figure 30.5 shows a parallel
FFT circuit, which computes the FFT onninputs, fornD8.  The circuit begins
with a bit-reverse  permutation  of the inputs,  followed by lgnstages,  each stage
consisting  ofn=2butterflies  executed  in parallel.   Thedepthof the circuit—the
maximum number of computational  elements between any output and any input
that can reach it—is therefore‚.lgn/.
The leftmost part of the parallel FFT circuit performs the bit-reverse permuta-
tion, and the remainder mimics the iterative I
TERATIVE-FFT procedure.  Because
each iteration of the outermostforloop performsn=2independent butterfly opera-
tions, the circuit performs them in parallel.  The value ofsin each iteration within

920Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
ITERATIVE-FFT  corresponds to a stage of butterflies shown in Figure 30.5.  For
sD1;2;:::;lgn,stagesconsists ofn=2
s
groups of butterflies (corresponding to
each value ofkin I
TERATIVE-FFT), with2
s1
butterflies per group (corresponding
to each value ofjin I
TERATIVE-FFT). The butterflies shown in Figure 30.5 corre-
spond to the butterfly operations of the innermost loop (lines 9–12 of I
TERATIVE-
FFT). Note also that the twiddle factors used in the butterflies correspond to those
used in I
TERATIVE-FFT: in stages,weuse!
0
m
;!
1
m
;:::;!
m=21
m
,wheremD2
s
.
Exercises
30.3-1
Show how I
TERATIVE-FFT  computes the DFT of the input vector.0;2;3;1; 4;
5; 7; 9/.
30.3-2
Show how to implement an FFT algorithm with the bit-reversal permutation occur-
ring at the end, rather than at the beginning, of the computation.  (Hint:Consider
the inverse DFT.)
30.3-3
How many times does  I
TERATIVE-FFT  compute  twiddle  factors  in each  stage?
Rewrite I
TERATIVE-FFT to compute twiddle factors only2
s1
times in stages.
30.3-4?
Suppose that the adders within the butterfly operations  of the FFT circuit some-
times fail in such a manner that they always produce a zero output,  independent
of their inputs. Suppose that exactly one adder has failed, but that you don’t know
which one.  Describe how you can identify the failed adder by supplying inputs to
the overall FFT circuit and observing the outputs. How efficient is your method?
Problems
30-1  Divide-and-conquer multiplication
a.Show how to multiply two linear polynomialsaxCbandcxCdusing only
three multiplications. (Hint:One of the multiplications is.aCb/.cCd/.)
b.Give two divide-and-conquer  algorithms  for  multiplying  two polynomials  of
degree-boundnin‚.n
lg3
/time.  The first algorithm  should  divide the input
polynomial coefficients into a high half and a low half, and the second algorithm
should divide them according to whether their index is odd or even.

Problems for Chapter 30921
c.Show  how  to  multiply  twon-bit  integers  inO.n
lg3
/steps,  where  each  step
operates on at most a constant number of1-bit values.
30-2  Toeplitz matrices
AToeplitz matrixis  ann	nmatrixAD.a
ij
/such  thata
ij
Da
i1;j1
for
iD2;3;:::;nandjD2;3;:::;n.
a.Is the sum of two Toeplitz matrices necessarily Toeplitz? What about the prod-
uct?
b.Describe  how  to represent  a  Toeplitz  matrix  so that  you  can  add  twon	n
Toeplitz matrices inO.n/time.
c.Give anO.nlgn/-time algorithm for multiplying ann	nToeplitz matrix by a
vector of lengthn. Use your representation from part (b).
d.Give an efficient algorithm for multiplying twon	nToeplitz matrices. Analyze
its running time.
30-3  Multidimensional fast Fourier transform
We can generalize the1-dimensional discrete Fourier transform defined by equa-
tion (30.8) toddimensions.  The input is ad-dimensional arrayAD.a
j
1
;j
2
;:::;j
d
/
whose  dimensions  aren
1
;n
2
;:::;n
d
,wheren
1
n
2
n
d
Dn.Wedefinethe
d-dimensional discrete Fourier transform by the equation
y
k
1
;k
2
;:::;k
d
D
n
1
1
X
j
1
D0
n
2
1
X
j
2
D0

n
d
1
X
j
d
D0
a
j
1
;j
2
;:::;j
d
!
j
1
k
1
n
1
!
j
2
k
2
n
2
!
j
d
k
d
n
d
for0k
1
<n
1
,0k
2
<n
2
, ...,0k
d
<n
d
.
a.Show that we can compute ad-dimensional DFT by computing1-dimensional
DFTs  on  each  dimension  in  turn.   That  is,  we  first  computen=n
1
separate
1-dimensional  DFTs along dimension1.  Then,  using the result  of the DFTs
along dimension1as the input, we computen=n
2
separate1-dimensional DFTs
along dimension2.  Using this result as the input, we computen=n
3
separate
1-dimensional DFTs along dimension3, and so on, through dimensiond.
b.Show that the ordering of dimensions does not matter, so that we can compute
ad-dimensional DFT by computing the1-dimensional  DFTs in any order of
theddimensions.

922Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
c.Show that if we compute each1-dimensional DFT by computing the fast Four-
ier  transform,  the  total  time  to  compute  ad-dimensional  DFT  isO.nlgn/,
independent ofd.
30-4  Evaluating all derivatives of a polynomial at a point
Given a polynomialA.x/of degree-boundn, we define itstth derivative by
A
.t /
.x/D
„
A.x/iftD0;
d
dx
A
.t1/
.x/if1tn1;
0iftn:
From the coefficient representation.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n1
/ofA.x/and a given pointx
0
,
we wish to determineA
.t /
.x
0
/fortD0; 1; : : : ; n1.
a.Given coefficientsb
0
;b
1
;:::;b
n1
such that
A.x/D
n1
X
jD0
b
j
.xx
0
/
j
;
show how to computeA
.t /
.x
0
/,fortD0; 1; : : : ; n1,inO.n/time.
b.Explain how to findb
0
;b
1
;:::;b
n1
inO.nlgn/time, givenA.x
0
C!
k
n
/for
kD0; 1; : : : ; n1.
c.Prove that
A.x
0
C!
k
n
/D
n1
X
rD0
 
!
kr
n
rŠ
n1
X
jD0
f.j/g.rj/
!
;
wheref.j/Da
j
jŠand
g.l/D
(
x
l
0
=.l/Šif.n1/l0;
0if1ln1:
d.Explain  how  to  evaluateA.x
0
C!
k
n
/forkD0; 1; : : : ; n1inO.nlgn/
time.  Conclude that we can evaluate all nontrivial derivatives ofA.x/atx
0
in
O.nlgn/time.

Problems for Chapter 30923
30-5  Polynomial evaluation at multiple points
We have seen how to evaluate a polynomial of degree-boundnat a single point in
O.n/time using Horner’s rule.  We have also discovered how to evaluate such a
polynomial at allncomplex roots of unity inO.nlgn/time using the FFT.  We
shall  now  show  how  to  evaluate  a polynomial  of  degree-boundnatnarbitrary
points inO.nlg
2
n/time.
To do so, we shall assume that we can compute the polynomial remainder when
one such polynomial is divided by another inO.nlgn/time, a result that we state
without proof. For example, the remainder of3x
3
Cx
2
3xC1when divided by
x
2
CxC2is
.3x
3
Cx
2
3xC1/mod.x
2
CxC2/D7xC5:
Given the coefficient representation  of a polynomialA.x/D
P
n1
kD0
a
k
x
k
and
npointsx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
,  we  wish  to  compute  thenvaluesA.x
0
/; A.x
1
/;:::;
A.x
n1
/.For0ijn1, define the polynomialsP
ij
.x/D
Q
j
kDi
.xx
k
/
andQ
ij
.x/DA.x/modP
ij
.x/. Note thatQ
ij
.x/has degree at mostji.
a.Prove thatA.x/mod.x ́/DA. ́/for any point ́.
b.Prove thatQ
kk
.x/DA.x
k
/and thatQ
0;n1
.x/DA.x/.
c.Prove  that  forikj,wehaveQ
ik
.x/DQ
ij
.x/modP
ik
.x/and
Q
kj
.x/DQ
ij
.x/modP
kj
.x/.
d.Give anO.nlg
2
n/-time algorithm to evaluateA.x
0
/; A.x
1
/;:::;A.x
n1
/.
30-6  FFT using modular arithmetic
As defined,  the discrete  Fourier transform  requires  us to compute with complex
numbers, which can result in a loss of precision due to round-off errors. For some
problems, the answer is known to contain only integers, and by using a variant of
the FFT based on modular arithmetic, we can guarantee that the answer is calcu-
lated exactly. An example of such a problem is that of multiplying two polynomials
with integer coefficients.  Exercise 30.2-6 gives one approach, using a modulus of
length.n/bits to handle  a DFT onnpoints.   This problem  gives another  ap-
proach, which uses a modulus of the more reasonable lengthO.lgn/; it requires
that you understand the material of Chapter 31. Letnbe a power of2.
a.Suppose that we search for the smallestksuch thatpDknC1is prime. Give
a simple heuristic argument why we might expectkto be approximately lnn.
(The value ofkmight be much larger or smaller, but we can reasonably expect
to examineO.lgn/candidate values ofkon average.)  How does the expected
length ofpcompare to the length ofn?

924Chapter 30Polynomials and the FFT
Letgbe a generator ofZ

p
,andletwDg
k
modp.
b.Argue that the DFT and the inverse DFT are well-defined inverse operations
modulop,wherewis used as a principalnth root of unity.
c.Show how to make the FFT and its inverse work modulopin timeO.nlgn/,
where  operations  on  words  ofO.lgn/bits  take  unit  time.   Assume  that  the
algorithm is givenpandw.
d.Compute the DFT modulopD17of the vector.0;5;3;7;7;2;1;6/. Note that
gD3is a generator ofZ

17
.
Chapter notes
Van Loan’s book [343] provides an outstanding treatment of the fast Fourier trans-
form.  Press, Teukolsky, Vetterling, and Flannery [283, 284] have a good descrip-
tion of the fast Fourier transform and its applications. For an excellent introduction
to signal processing, a popular FFT application area, see the texts by Oppenheim
and Schafer [266] and Oppenheim and Willsky [267]. The Oppenheim and Schafer
book also shows how to handle cases in whichnis not an integer power of2.
Fourier analysis is not limited to1-dimensional data. It is widely used in image
processing to analyze data in2or more dimensions.  The books by Gonzalez and
Woods [146] and Pratt [281] discuss multidimensional Fourier transforms and their
use in image processing, and books by Tolimieri, An, and Lu [338] and Van Loan
[343] discuss the mathematics of multidimensional fast Fourier transforms.
Cooley and Tukey [76] are widely credited with devising the FFT in the 1960s.
The FFT had in fact been discovered many times previously, but its importance was
not fully realized before the advent of modern digital computers.  Although Press,
Teukolsky,  Vetterling, and Flannery attribute the origins of the method to Runge
and K  ̈onig in 1924, an article by Heideman, Johnson, and Burrus [163] traces the
history of the FFT as far back as C. F. Gauss in 1805.
Frigo  and  Johnson  [117]  developed  a  fast  and  flexible  implementation  of  the
FFT, called FFTW (“fastest Fourier transform in the West”). FFTW is designed for
situations requiring multiple DFT computations on the same problem size. Before
actually computing the DFTs, FFTW executes a “planner,” which, by a series of
trial runs, determines how best to decompose the FFT computation for the given
problem  size on the host machine.   FFTW adapts to use the hardware cache ef-
ficiently, and once subproblems are small enough, FFTW solves them with opti-
mized, straight-line code. Furthermore, FFTW has the unusual advantage of taking
‚.nlgn/time for any problem sizen,evenwhennis a large prime.

Notes for Chapter 30925
Although the standard Fourier transform assumes that the input represents points
that are uniformly spaced in the time domain, other techniques can approximate the
FFT on “nonequispaced” data. The article by Ware [348] provides an overview.

31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Number theory was once viewed as a beautiful but largely useless subject in pure
mathematics. Today number-theoretic algorithms are used widely, due in large part
to the invention of cryptographic schemes based on large prime numbers.  These
schemes are feasible because we can find large primes easily, and they are secure
because we do not know how to factor the product of large primes (or solve related
problems, such as computing discrete logarithms) efficiently. This chapter presents
some of the number theory and related algorithms that underlie such applications.
Section  31.1 introduces  basic concepts  of number  theory,  such as divisibility,
modular  equivalence,  and  unique  factorization.   Section  31.2  studies  one  of  the
world’s oldest algorithms:  Euclid’s algorithm for computing the greatest common
divisor of two integers. Section 31.3 reviews concepts of modular arithmetic. Sec-
tion 31.4 then studies the set of multiples of a given numbera, modulon,andshows
how to find all solutions to the equationaxb.modn/by using Euclid’s algo-
rithm.  The Chinese remainder theorem is presented in Section 31.5.  Section 31.6
considers powers of a given numbera, modulon, and presents a repeated-squaring
algorithm for efficiently computinga
b
modn,givena,b,andn. This operation is
at the heart of efficient primality testing and of much modern cryptography.  Sec-
tion 31.7 then describes the RSA public-key cryptosystem. Section 31.8 examines
a randomized primality test.  We can use this test to find large primes efficiently,
which we need to do in order to create keys for the RSA cryptosystem.  Finally,
Section 31.9 reviews a simple but effective heuristic for factoring small integers. It
is a curious fact that factoring is one problem people may wish to be intractable,
since the security of RSA depends on the difficulty of factoring large integers.
Size of inputs and cost of arithmetic computations
Because we shall be working with large integers, we need to adjust how we think
about the size of an input and about the cost of elementary arithmetic operations.
In this chapter,  a “large  input” typically  means an input  containing  “large in-
tegers”  rather  than  an  input  containing  “many  integers”  (as  for  sorting).   Thus,

31.1Elementary number-theoretic notions927
we shall measure the size of an input in terms of thenumber of bitsrequired to
represent  that  input,  not  just  the number  of integers  in the input.   An algorithm
with integer inputsa
1
;a
2
;:::;a
k
is apolynomial-time algorithmif it runs in time
polynomial in lga
1
;lga
2
;:::;lga
k
, that is, polynomial in the lengths of its binary-
encoded inputs.
In  most  of  this  book,  we  have  found  it  convenient  to  think  of  the  elemen-
tary  arithmetic  operations  (multiplications,  divisions,  or  computing  remainders)
as primitive operations that take one unit of time. By counting the number of such
arithmetic  operations  that  an algorithm  performs,  we have a basis  for  making  a
reasonable estimate of the algorithm’s actual running time on a computer. Elemen-
tary operations can be time-consuming,  however,  when their inputs are large.  It
thus becomes convenient to measure how manybit operationsa number-theoretic
algorithm requires.  In this model, multiplying twoˇ-bit integers by the ordinary
method uses‚.ˇ
2
/bit operations.  Similarly, we can divide aˇ-bit integer by a
shorter integer or take the remainder of aˇ-bit integer when divided by a shorter in-
teger in time‚.ˇ
2
/by simple algorithms. (See Exercise 31.1-12.) Faster methods
are known. For example, a simple divide-and-conquer method for multiplying two
ˇ-bit integers has a running time of‚.ˇ
lg3
/, and the fastest  known method has
a running time of‚.ˇlgˇlg lgˇ/.  For practical  purposes,  however,  the‚.ˇ
2
/
algorithm is often best, and we shall use this bound as a basis for our analyses.
We shall generally analyze algorithms in this chapter in terms of both the number
of arithmetic operations and the number of bit operations they require.
31.1  Elementary number-theoretic notions
This section  provides  a brief  review  of  notions  from  elementary  number  theory
concerning  the  setZD
f
:::;2;1; 0; 1; 2; : : :
g
of  integers  and  the  setND
f
0; 1; 2; : : :
g
of natural numbers.
Divisibility and divisors
The notion of one integer being divisible by another is key to the theory of numbers.
The notationdja(read “ddividesa”) means thataDkdfor some integerk.
Every integer divides0.Ifa>0anddja,then
j
d
j

j
a
j
.Ifdja,thenwealso
say thatais amultipleofd.Ifddoes not dividea, we writed−a.
Ifdjaandd0, we say thatdis adivisorofa.  Note thatdjaif and only
ifdja, so that no generality is lost by defining the divisors to be nonnegative,
with  the  understanding  that  the  negative  of  any  divisor  ofaalso  dividesa.A

928Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
divisor of a nonzero integerais at least1but not greater than
j
a
j
. For example, the
divisors of24are1,2,3,4,6,8,12,and24.
Every positive integerais divisible by thetrivial divisors1anda. The nontrivial
divisors ofaare thefactorsofa. For example, the factors of20are2,4,5,and10.
Prime and composite numbers
An integera>1whose only divisors are the trivial divisors1andais aprime
numberor, more simply, aprime. Primes have many special properties and play a
critical role in number theory. The first 20 primes, in order, are
2;  3;  5; 7;  11;  13;  17;  19;  23;  29;  31;  37;  41;  43;  47;  53;  59;  61;  67;  71 :
Exercise 31.1-2 asks you to prove that there are infinitely many primes. An integer
a>1that is not prime is acomposite numberor, more simply, acomposite.For
example,39is composite because3j39.  We call the integer1aunit, and it is
neither prime nor composite.  Similarly, the integer0and all negative integers are
neither prime nor composite.
The division theorem, remainders, and modular equivalence
Givenanintegern, we can partition the integers into those that are multiples ofn
and those that are not multiples ofn.  Much number theory is based upon refining
this partition  by classifying  the nonmultiples  ofnaccording  to their remainders
when divided by
n.  The following theorem provides the basis for this refinement.
We omit the proof (but see, for example, Niven and Zuckerman [265]).
Theorem 31.1 (Division theorem)
For any integeraand any positive integern, there exist unique integersqandr
such that0r<nandaDqnCr.
The valueqD
b
a=n
c
is thequotientof the division.  The valuerDamodn
is theremainder(orresidue) of the division.  We have thatnjaif and only if
amodnD0.
We can partition the integers intonequivalence  classes according  to their re-
mainders modulon.Theequivalence class moduloncontaining an integerais
Œa
n
D
f
aCknWk2Z
g
:
For example,Œ3
7
D
f
:::;11;4; 3; 10; 17; : : :
g
; we can also denote this set by
Œ4
7
andŒ10
7
.  Using the notation defined on page 54, we can say that writing
a2Œb
n
is the same as writingab.modn/.  The set of all such equivalence
classes is

31.1Elementary number-theoretic notions929
Z
n
D
f
Œa
n
W0an1
g
:(31.1)
When you see the definition
Z
n
D
f
0; 1; : : : ; n1
g
;(31.2)
you should read it as equivalent to equation (31.1) with the understanding that0
representsŒ0
n
,1representsŒ1
n
, and so on; each class is represented by its smallest
nonnegative element. You should keep the underlying equivalence classes in mind,
however. For example, if we refer to1asamemberofZ
n
, we are really referring
toŒn1
n
,since1n1.modn/.
Common divisors and greatest common divisors
Ifdis a divisor ofaanddis also a divisor ofb,thendis acommon divisorofa
andb.  For example, the divisors of30are1,2,3,5,6,10,15,and30,andsothe
common divisors of24and30are1,2,3,and6.  Note that1is a common divisor
of any two integers.
An important property of common divisors is that
djaanddjbimpliesdj.aCb/anddj.ab/ :(31.3)
More generally, we have that
djaanddjbimpliesdj.axCby/(31.4)
for any integersxand
y.  Also, ifajb, then either
j
a
j

j
b
j
orbD0,which
implies that
ajbandbjaimpliesaD ̇b:(31.5)
Thegreatest common divisorof  two  integersaandb,  not  both  zero,  is  the
largest of the common divisors ofaandb;wedenoteitbygcd.a; b/. For example,
gcd.24; 30/D6,gcd.5; 7/D1, and gcd.0; 9/D9.Ifaandbare both nonzero,
then gcd.a; b/is an integer between1and min.
j
a
j
;
j
b
j
/.  We define gcd.0; 0/to
be0; this definition is necessary to make standard properties of the gcd function
(such as equation (31.9) below) universally valid.
The following are elementary properties of the gcd function:
gcd.a; b/Dgcd.b; a/ ;(31.6)
gcd.a; b/Dgcd.a; b/ ;(31.7)
gcd.a; b/D
gcd.
j
a
j
;
j
b
j
/;(31.8)
gcd.a; 0/D
j
a
j
;(31.9)
gcd.a; ka/D
j
a
j
for anyk2Z:(31.10)
The  following  theorem  provides  an  alternative  and  useful  characterization  of
gcd.a; b/.

930Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Theorem 31.2
Ifaandbare any integers, not both zero, then gcd.a; b/is the smallest positive
element of the set
f
axCbyWx; y2Z
g
of linear combinations ofaandb.
ProofLetsbe the smallest positive such linear combination ofaandb,andlet
sDaxCbyfor somex; y2Z.LetqD
b
a=s
c
. Equation (3.8) then implies
amodsDaqs
Daq.axCby/
Da.1qx/Cb.qy/ ;
and  soamodsis  a  linear  combination  ofaandbas  well.    But,  since0
amods<s,wehavethatamodsD0, becausesis the smallest positive such lin-
ear combination. Therefore, we have thatsjaand, by analogous reasoning,sjb.
Thus,
sis a common divisor ofaandb, and so gcd.a; b/s.  Equation (31.4)
implies that gcd.a; b/js,sincegcd.a; b/divides bothaandbandsis a linear
combination ofaandb.  But gcd.a; b/jsands>0imply that gcd.a; b/s.
Combining gcd.a; b/sand gcd.a; b/syields gcd.a; b/Ds.  We conclude
thatsis the greatest common divisor ofaandb.
Corollary 31.3
For any integersaandb,ifdjaanddjb,thendjgcd.a; b/.
ProofThis corollary follows from equation (31.4), because gcd.a; b/is a linear
combination ofaandbby Theorem 31.2.
Corollary 31.4
For all integersaandband any nonnegative integern,
gcd.an; b n/Dngcd.a; b/ :
ProofIfnD0, the corollary is trivial. Ifn>0,thengcd.an; b n/is the smallest
positive element of the set
f
anxCbnyWx; y2Z
g
,whichisntimes the smallest
positive element of the set
f
axCbyWx; y2Z
g
.
Corollary 31.5
For all positive integersn,a,andb,ifnjaband gcd.a; n/D1,thennjb.
ProofWe leave the proof as Exercise 31.1-5.

31.1Elementary number-theoretic notions931
Relatively prime integers
Two integersaandbarerelatively primeif their only common divisor is1,that
is, if gcd.a; b/D1. For example,8and15are relatively prime, since the divisors
of8are1,2,4,and8, and the divisors of15are1,3,5,and15.  The following
theorem states that if two integers are each relatively prime to an integerp,then
their product is relatively prime top.
Theorem 31.6
For  any  integersa,b,andp,  if  both  gcd.a; p/D1and  gcd.b; p/D1,then
gcd.ab; p/D1.
ProofIt follows from Theorem 31.2 that there exist integersx,y,x
0
,andy
0
such
that
axCpyD1;
bx
0
Cpy
0
D1:
Multiplying these equations and rearranging, we have
ab.xx
0
/Cp.ybx
0
Cy
0
axCpyy
0
/D1:
Since1is  thus  a  positive  linear  combination  ofabandp,  an  appeal  to  Theo-
rem 31.2 completes the proof.
Integersn
1
,n
2
, ...,n
k
arepairwise relatively primeif, wheneveri¤j,we
have gcd.n
i
;n
j
/D1.
Unique factorization
An elementary but important fact about divisibility by primes is the following.
Theorem 31.7
For all primespand all integersaandb,ifpjab,thenpjaorpjb(or both).
ProofAssume for the purpose of contradiction thatpjab,butthatp−aand
p−b. Thus, gcd.a; p/D1and gcd.b; p/D1, since the only divisors ofpare1
andp, and we assume thatpdivides neitheranorb.  Theorem 31.6 then implies
that  gcd.ab; p/D1,  contradicting  our  assumption  thatpjab,sincepjab
implies gcd.ab; p/Dp. This contradiction completes the proof.
A consequence of Theorem 31.7 is that we can uniquely factor any composite
integer into a product of primes.

932Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Theorem 31.8 (Unique factorization)
There is exactly one way to write any composite integeraas a product of the form
aDp
e
1
1
p
e
2
2
p
e
r
r
;
where thep
i
are prime,p
1
<p
2
<<p
r
,andthee
i
are positive integers.
ProofWe leave the proof as Exercise 31.1-11.
As an example, the number6000is uniquely factored into primes as2
4
35
3
.
Exercises
31.1-1
Prove that ifa>b>0andcDaCb,thencmodaDb.
31.1-2
Prove that there are infinitely many primes.  (Hint:Show that none of the primes
p
1
;p
2
;:::;p
k
divide.p
1
p
2
p
k
/C1.)
31.1-3
Prove that ifajbandbjc,thenajc.
31.1-4
Prove that ifpis prime and0<k<p,thengcd.k; p/D1.
31.1-5
Prove Corollary 31.5.
31.1-6
Prove that ifpis prime and0<k<p,thenpj

p
k

. Conclude that for all integers
aandband all primesp,
.aCb/
p
a
p
Cb
p
.modp/ :
31.1-7
Prove that ifaandbare any positive integers such thatajb,then
.xmodb/modaDxmoda
for anyx. Prove, under the same assumptions, that
xy.modb/impliesxy.moda/
for any integersxandy.

31.2Greatest common divisor933
31.1-8
For any integerk>0,anintegernis akth powerif there exists an integerasuch
thata
k
Dn.  Furthermore,n>1is anontrivial powerif it is akth power for
some integerk>1.  Show how to determine whether a givenˇ-bit integernis a
nontrivial power in time polynomial inˇ.
31.1-9
Prove equations (31.6)–(31.10).
31.1-10
Show that the gcd operator is associative.  That is, prove that for all integersa,b,
andc,
gcd.a;gcd.b; c//Dgcd.gcd.a; b/; c/ :
31.1-11?
Prove Theorem 31.8.
31.1-12
Give efficient algorithms for the operations of dividing aˇ-bit integer by a shorter
integer and of taking the remainder of aˇ-bit integer when divided by a shorter
integer. Your algorithms should run in time‚.ˇ
2
/.
31.1-13
Give an efficient algorithm to convert a givenˇ-bit (binary) integer to a decimal
representation.   Argue that if multiplication  or division of integers whose length
is  at  mostˇtakes  timeM.ˇ/,  then  we  can  convert  binary  to  decimal  in  time
‚.M.ˇ/lgˇ/.(Hint:Use a divide-and-conquer  approach, obtaining the top and
bottom halves of the result with separate recursions.)
31.2  Greatest common divisor
In this section, we describe Euclid’s algorithm for efficiently computing the great-
est common divisor of two integers.  When we analyze the running time, we shall
see a surprising connection with the Fibonacci numbers, which yield a worst-case
input for Euclid’s algorithm.
We restrict ourselves in this section to nonnegative integers.  This restriction is
justified by equation (31.8), which states that gcd.a; b/Dgcd.
j
a
j
;
j
b
j
/.

934Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
In principle,  we can compute gcd.a; b/for positive integersaandbfrom the
prime factorizations ofaandb. Indeed, if
aDp
e
1
1
p
e
2
2
p
e
r
r
;(31.11)
bDp
f
1
1
p
f
2
2
p
f
r
r
;(31.12)
with zero exponents being used to make the set of primesp
1
;p
2
;:::;p
r
the same
for bothaandb, then, as Exercise 31.2-1 asks you to show,
gcd.a; b/Dp
min.e
1
;f
1
/
1
p
min.e
2
;f
2
/
2
p
min.e
r
;f
r
/
r
:(31.13)
As we shall show in Section 31.9, however, the best algorithms to date for factoring
do not run in polynomial time. Thus, this approach to computing greatest common
divisors seems unlikely to yield an efficient algorithm.
Euclid’s algorithm for computing greatest common divisors relies on the follow-
ing theorem.
Theorem 31.9 (GCD recursion theorem)
For any nonnegative integeraand any positive integerb,
gcd.a; b/Dgcd.b; amodb/ :
ProofWe shall show that gcd.a; b/and gcd.b; amodb/divide each other,  so
that by equation (31.5) they must be equal (since they are both nonnegative).
We first show that gcd.a; b/jgcd.b; amodb/.IfweletdDgcd.a; b/,then
djaanddjb.   By equation  (3.8),amodbDaqb,whereqD
b
a=b
c
.
Sinceamodbis thus a linear combination ofaandb, equation (31.4) implies that
dj.amodb/.  Therefore, sincedjbanddj.amodb/, Corollary 31.3 implies
thatdjgcd.b; amodb/or, equivalently, that
gcd.a; b/jgcd
.b; amodb/:(31.14)
Showing that gcd.b; amodb/jgcd.a; b/is almost the same.   If we now let
dDgcd.b; amodb/,thendjbanddj.amodb/.SinceaDqbC.amodb/,
whereqD
b
a=b
c
,wehavethatais a linear combination ofband.amodb/.By
equation  (31.4),  we conclude  thatdja.Sincedjbanddja,wehavethat
djgcd.a; b/by Corollary 31.3 or, equivalently, that
gcd.b; amodb/jgcd.a; b/:(31.15)
Using  equation  (31.5)  to  combine  equations  (31.14)  and  (31.15)  completes  the
proof.

31.2Greatest common divisor935
Euclid’s algorithm
TheElementsof Euclid (circa 300
B.C.)  describes  the following  gcd algorithm,
although  it  may  be  of  even  earlier  origin.   We  express  Euclid’s  algorithm  as  a
recursive program based directly on Theorem 31.9. The inputsaandbare arbitrary
nonnegative integers.
E
UCLID.a; b/
1ifb
==0
2returna
3else returnE
UCLID.b; amodb/
As an example of the running of E
UCLID, consider the computation of gcd.30; 21/:
E
UCLID.30; 21/DEUCLID.21; 9/
DE
UCLID.9; 3/
DE
UCLID.3; 0/
D3:
This computation calls E
UCLIDrecursively three times.
The correctness of E
UCLIDfollows from Theorem 31.9 and the property that if
the algorithm returnsain line 2, thenbD0, so that equation (31.9) implies that
gcd.a; b/Dgcd.a; 0/Da.  The algorithm cannot recurse indefinitely, since the
second argument strictly decreases in each recursive call and is always nonnegative.
Therefore, E
UCLIDalways terminates with the correct answer.
The running time of Euclid’s algorithm
We analyze  the worst-case running  time of  E
UCLIDas a function  of the size of
aandb.  We assume with no loss of generality thata>b0.  To justify this
assumption, observe that ifb>a0,thenE
UCLID.a; b/immediately makes the
recursive call E
UCLID.b; a/.  That is, if the first argument is less than the second
argument, E
UCLIDspends one recursive call swapping its arguments and then pro-
ceeds.  Similarly, ifbDa>0, the procedure terminates after one recursive call,
sinceamodbD0.
The overall running time of E
UCLIDis proportional to the number of recursive
calls it makes.  Our analysis makes use of the Fibonacci numbersF
k
,definedby
the recurrence (3.22).
Lemma 31.10
Ifa>b1and the call  E
UCLID.a; b/performsk1recursive  calls,  then
aF
kC2
andbF
kC1
.

936Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
ProofThe proof proceeds by induction onk.  For the basis of the induction, let
kD1.  Then,b1DF
2
, and sincea>b,wemusthavea2DF
3
.Since
b>.amodb/, in each recursive call the first argument is strictly larger than the
second; the assumption thata>btherefore holds for each recursive call.
Assume inductively that the lemma holds ifk1recursive calls are made; we
shall then prove that the lemma holds forkrecursive calls.  Sincek>0,wehave
b>0,andE
UCLID.a; b/calls  EUCLID.b; amodb/recursively,  which  in turn
makesk1recursive calls. The inductive hypothesis then implies thatbF
kC1
(thus proving part of the lemma), andamodbF
k
.Wehave
bC.amodb/DbC.ab
b
a=b
c
/
a;
sincea>b>0implies
b
a=b
c
1. Thus,
abC.amodb/
F
kC1
CF
k
DF
kC2
:
The following theorem is an immediate corollary of this lemma.
Theorem 31.11 (Lam
 ́
e’s theorem)
For any integerk1,ifa>b1andb<F
kC1
, then the call EUCLID.a; b/
makes fewer thankrecursive calls.
We can  show  that  the  upper  bound  of  Theorem  31.11  is the best  possible  by
showing  that  the  call  E
UCLID.F
kC1
;F
k
/makes  exactlyk1recursive  calls
whenk2.   We use  induction  onk.   For  the base  case,kD2,  and the  call
E
UCLID.F
3
;F
2
/makes exactly one recursive call, to EUCLID.1; 0/.(Wehaveto
start atkD2, because whenkD1we do not haveF
2
>F
1
.)  For the induc-
tive step, assume that E
UCLID.F
k
;F
k1
/makes exactlyk2recursive calls. For
k>2,wehaveF
k
>F
k1
>0andF
kC1
DF
k
CF
k1
, and so by Exercise 31.1-1,
we haveF
kC1
modF
k
DF
k1
. Thus, we have
gcd.F
kC1
;F
k
/Dgcd.F
k
;F
kC1
modF
k
/
Dgcd.F
k
;F
k1
/:
Therefore,   the  call  E
UCLID.F
kC1
;F
k
/recurses  one  time  more  than  the  call
E
UCLID.F
k
;F
k1
/,  or  exactlyk1times,  meeting  the  upper  bound  of  Theo-
rem 31.11.
SinceF
k
is approximately
k
=
p
5,whereis the golden ratio.1C
p
5/=2de-
fined by equation (3.24), the number of recursive calls in E
UCLIDisO.lgb/.(See

31.2Greatest common divisor937
ab
b
a=b
c
dx  y
9978131114
782133311
21151323
1562312
63   2  3 0   1
30  — 3 1   0
Figure 31.1How E
XTENDED-EUCLIDcomputes gcd.99; 78/.  Each line shows one level of the
recursion:  the values of the inputsaandb, the computed value
b
a=b
c
, and the valuesd,x,andy
returned.  The triple.d; x; y/returned becomes the triple.d
0
;x
0
;y
0
/used at the next higher level
of recursion. The call E
XTENDED-EUCLID.99; 78/returns.3;11; 14/,sothatgcd.99; 78/D3D
99.11/C7814.
Exercise 31.2-5 for a tighter bound.)  Therefore, if we call EUCLIDon twoˇ-bit
numbers,  then it performsO.ˇ/arithmetic operations  andO.ˇ
3
/bit operations
(assuming that multiplication and division ofˇ-bit numbers takeO.ˇ
2
/bit oper-
ations).   Problem  31-2  asks you to show anO.ˇ
2
/bound  on the number  of  bit
operations.
The extended form of Euclid’s algorithm
We  now  rewrite  Euclid’s  algorithm  to  compute  additional  useful  information.
Specifically, we extend the algorithm to compute the integer coefficientsxandy
such that
dDgcd.a; b/DaxCby :(31.16)
Note thatxandymay be zero or negative.  We shall find these coefficients useful
later for computing modular multiplicative inverses.  The procedure E
XTENDED-
E
UCLIDtakes as input  a pair  of nonnegative  integers  and returns  a triple of the
form.d;x;y/that satisfies equation (31.16).
E
XTENDED-EUCLID.a; b/
1ifb
==0
2return.a;1;0/
3else.d
0
;x
0
;y
0
/DEXTENDED-EUCLID.b; amodb/
4.d;x;y/D.d
0
;y
0
;x
0

b
a=b
c
y
0
/
5return.d;x;y/
Figure 31.1 illustrates how E
XTENDED-EUCLIDcomputes gcd.99; 78/.
The  E
XTENDED-EUCLIDprocedure  is  a  variation  of  the  EUCLIDprocedure.
Line 1 is equivalent  to the test  “b
==0” in line  1 of  EUCLID.IfbD0,then

938Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
EXTENDED-EUCLIDreturns not onlydDain line 2,  but also the coefficients
xD1andyD0,sothataDaxCby.Ifb¤0,E
XTENDED-EUCLIDfirst
computes.d
0
;x
0
;y
0
/such thatd
0
Dgcd.b; amodb/and
d
0
Dbx
0
C.amodb/y
0
:(31.17)
As for E
UCLID,  we have in this casedDgcd.a; b/Dd
0
Dgcd.b; amodb/.
To obtainxandysuch thatdDaxCby, we start by rewriting equation (31.17)
using the equationdDd
0
and equation (3.8):
dDbx
0
C.ab
b
a=b
c
/y
0
Day
0
Cb.x
0

b
a=b
c
y
0
/:
Thus, choosingxDy
0
andyDx
0

b
a=b
c
y
0
satisfies the equationdDaxCby,
proving the correctness of E
XTENDED-EUCLID.
Since  the  number  of  recursive  calls  made  in  E
UCLIDis  equal  to  the  number
of  recursive  calls  made  in  E
XTENDED-EUCLID,  the  running  times  of  EUCLID
and  EXTENDED-EUCLIDare the same,  to within a constant  factor.   That is,  for
a>b>0, the number of recursive calls isO.lgb/.
Exercises
31.2-1
Prove that equations (31.11) and (31.12) imply equation (31.13).
31.2-2
Compute the values.d;x;y/that the call E
XTENDED-EUCLID.899; 493/returns.
31.2-3
Prove that for all integersa,k,andn,
gcd.a; n/Dgcd.aCkn;n/ :
31.2-4
Rewrite E
UCLIDin an iterative form that uses only a constant amount of memory
(that is, stores only a constant number of integer values).
31.2-5
Ifa>b0, show that the call E
UCLID.a; b/makes at most1Clog

brecursive
calls. Improve this bound to1Clog

.b=gcd.a; b//.
31.2-6
What does E
XTENDED-EUCLID.F
kC1
;F
k
/return? Prove your answer correct.

31.3Modular arithmetic939
31.2-7
Define the gcd function  for  more than two arguments  by the recursive  equation
gcd.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n
/Dgcd.a
0
;gcd.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
//.  Show that the gcd function
returns the same answer independent of the order in which its arguments are speci-
fied. Also show how to find integersx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n
such that gcd.a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n
/D
a
0
x
0
Ca
1
x
1
CCa
n
x
n
. Show that the number of divisions performed by your
algorithm isO.nClg.max
f
a
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n
g
//.
31.2-8
Define  lcm.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
/to  be  theleast common multipleof  thenintegers
a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
, that is, the smallest nonnegative integer that is a multiple of eacha
i
.
Show how to compute lcm.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
/efficiently using the (two-argument) gcd
operation as a subroutine.
31.2-9
Prove thatn
1
,n
2
,n
3
,andn
4
are pairwise relatively prime if and only if
gcd.n
1
n
2
;n
3
n
4
/Dgcd.n
1
n
3
;n
2
n
4
/D1:
More generally, show thatn
1
;n
2
;:::;n
k
are pairwise relatively prime if and only
if a set of
d
lgk
e
pairs of numbers derived from then
i
are relatively prime.
31.3  Modular arithmetic
Informally,  we  can  think  of  modular  arithmetic  as  arithmetic  as  usual  over  the
integers, except that if we are working modulon, then every resultxis replaced
by the element of
f
0; 1; : : : ; n1
g
that is equivalent tox, modulon(that is,xis
replaced byxmodn).  This informal model suffices if we stick to the operations
of  addition,  subtraction,  and  multiplication.   A more  formal  model  for  modular
arithmetic, which we now give, is best described within the framework of group
theory.
Finite groups
Agroup.S; ̊/is a setStogether  with a binary operation ̊defined onSfor
which the following properties hold:
1.Closure:For alla,b2S,wehavea ̊b2S.
2.Identity:There exists an elemente2S, called theidentityof the group, such
thate ̊aDa ̊eDafor alla2S.
3.Associativity:For alla,b,c2S,wehave.a ̊b/ ̊cDa ̊.b ̊c/.

940Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
4.Inverses:For eacha2S,  there exists a unique elementb2S,  called the
inverseofa, such thata ̊bDb ̊aDe.
As an  example,  consider  the  familiar  group.Z;C/of  the  integersZunder  the
operation of addition:0is the identity, and the inverse ofaisa. If a group.S; ̊/
satisfies thecommutative lawa ̊bDb ̊afor alla; b2S,thenitisanabelian
group. If a group.S; ̊/satisfies
j
S
j
<1,thenitisafinite group.
The groups defined by modular addition and multiplication
We can form two finite abelian groups by using addition and multiplication mod-
ulon,wherenis a positive integer.  These groups are based on the equivalence
classes of the integers modulon, defined in Section 31.1.
To define  a  group  onZ
n
,  we need  to  have  suitable  binary  operations,  which
we  obtain  by  redefining  the  ordinary  operations  of  addition  and  multiplication.
We can easily define addition  and multiplication  operations  forZ
n
,  because  the
equivalence class of two integers uniquely determines the equivalence class of their
sum or product. That is, ifaa
0
.modn/andbb
0
.modn/,then
aCba
0
Cb
0
.modn/ ;
aba
0
b
0
.modn/ :
Thus, we define addition and multiplication modulon, denotedC
n
and
n
,by
Œa
n
C
n
Œb
n
DŒaCb
n
;(31.18)
Œa
n

n
Œb
n
DŒab
n
:
(We can define subtraction similarly onZ
n
byŒa
n

n
Œb
n
DŒab
n
, but divi-
sion is more complicated,  as we shall see.)  These facts justify the common and
convenient practice of using the smallest nonnegative element of each equivalence
class as its representative when performing computations inZ
n
. We add, subtract,
and multiply as usual on the representatives,  but we replace each resultxby the
representative of its class, that is, byxmodn.
Using  this  definition  of  addition  modulon,wedefinetheadditive group
modulonas.Z
n
;C
n
/.   The size  of  the additive  group  modulonis
j
Z
n
j
Dn.
Figure 31.2(a) gives the operation table for the group.Z
6
;C
6
/.
Theorem 31.12
The system.Z
n
;C
n
/is a finite abelian group.
ProofEquation (31.18) shows that.Z
n
;C
n
/is closed.  Associativity and com-
mutativity ofC
n
follow from the associativity and commutativity ofC:

31.3Modular arithmetic941
012345
0
1
2
3
4
5
012345
012345
012345
012345
012345
012345
(a)
1247811    13    14
1
2
4
7
8
11
13
14
1247811    13    14
248141711    13
48113214711
714134112 1 8
8 1 211413147
117142131 8 4
13   117114842
14131187421
(b)
+
6
·
15
Figure 31.2Two finite groups.  Equivalence classes are denoted by their representative elements.
(a)The group.Z
6
;C
6
/.(b)The group.Z

15
;
15
/.
.Œa
n
C
n
Œb
n
/C
n
Œc
n
DŒaCb
n
C
n
Œc
n
DŒ.aCb/Cc
n
DŒaC.bCc/
n
DŒa
n
C
n
ŒbCc
n
DŒa
n
C
n
.Œb
n
C
n
Œc
n
/;
Œa
n
C
n
Œb
n
DŒaCb
n
DŒbCa
n
DŒb
n
C
n
Œa
n
:
The identity element of.Z
n
;C
n
/is0(that is,Œ0
n
).  The (additive) inverse of
an elementa(that is, ofŒa
n
) is the elementa(that is,Œa
n
orŒna
n
), since
Œa
n
C
n
Œa
n
DŒaa
n
DŒ0
n
.
Using the definition  of  multiplication  modulon,wedefinethemultiplicative
group modulonas.Z

n
;
n
/. The elements of this group are the setZ

n
of elements
inZ
n
that are relatively prime ton, so that each one has a unique inverse, modulon:
Z

n
D
f
Œa
n
2Z
n
Wgcd.a; n/D1
g
:
To see thatZ

n
is well defined, note that for0a<n,wehavea.aCkn/
.modn/for all integersk.  By Exercise 31.2-3, therefore, gcd.a; n/D1implies
gcd.aCkn;n/D1for all integersk.SinceŒa
n
D
f
aCknWk2Z
g
, the setZ

n
is well defined. An example of such a group is
Z

15
D
f
1; 2; 4; 7; 8; 11; 13; 14
g
;

942Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
where the group operation  is multiplication  modulo15.  (Here we denote an el-
ementŒa
15
asa;  for example,  we denoteŒ7
15
as7.)  Figure 31.2(b)  shows the
group.Z

15
;
15
/.  For example,81113  .mod15/, working inZ

15
.Theiden-
tity for this group is1.
Theorem 31.13
The system.Z

n
;
n
/is a finite abelian group.
ProofTheorem 31.6 implies that.Z

n
;
n
/is closed.  Associativity and commu-
tativity can be proved for
n
as they were forC
n
in the proof of Theorem 31.12.
The identity element isŒ1
n
. To show the existence of inverses, letabe an element
ofZ

n
and let.d;x;y/be returned by EXTENDED-EUCLID.a; n/.  Then,dD1,
sincea2Z

n
,and
axCnyD1(31.19)
or, equivalently,
ax1.modn/ :
Thus,Œx
n
is a multiplicative  inverse ofŒa
n
, modulon.  Furthermore,  we claim
thatŒx
n
2Z

n
.  To see why, equation (31.19) demonstrates that the smallest pos-
itive linear combination ofxandnmust be1.  Therefore, Theorem 31.2 implies
that gcd.x; n/D1.  We defer  the proof that  inverses are uniquely  defined until
Corollary 31.26.
As an example of computing multiplicative inverses,  suppose thataD5and
nD11.ThenE
XTENDED-EUCLID.a; n/returns.d;x;y/D.1;2; 1/,sothat
1D5.2/C111. Thus,Œ2
11
(i.e.,Œ9
11
) is the multiplicative inverse ofŒ5
11
.
When working with the groups.Z
n
;C
n
/and.Z

n
;
n
/in the remainder of this
chapter, we follow the convenient practice of denoting equivalence classes by their
representative elements and denoting the operationsC
n
and
n
by the usual arith-
metic notationsCand(or juxtaposition, so thatabDab) respectively.  Also,
equivalences modulonmay also be interpreted as equations inZ
n
.  For example,
the following two statements are equivalent:
axb.modn/ ;
Œa
n

n
Œx
n
DŒb
n
:
As a further convenience,  we sometimes refer to a group.S; ̊/merely asS
when the operation ̊is understood from context. We may thus refer to the groups
.Z
n
;C
n
/and.Z

n
;
n
/asZ
n
andZ

n
, respectively.
We denote the (multiplicative) inverse of an elementaby.a
1
modn/. Division
inZ

n
is  defined  by  the  equationa=bab
1
.modn/.   For  example,  inZ

15

31.3Modular arithmetic943
we have  that7
1
13  .mod15/,since713D911.mod15/,sothat
4=74137.mod15/.
The size ofZ

n
is denoted.n/.  This function, known asEuler’s phi function,
satisfies the equation
.n/Dn
Y
pWpis prime andpjn

1
1
p

;(31.20)
so thatpruns  over  all  the primes dividingn(includingnitself,  ifnis prime).
We shall  not  prove this  formula  here.   Intuitively,  we begin  with a list of then
remainders
f
0; 1; : : : ; n1
g
and then, for each primepthat dividesn, cross out
every multiple ofpin the list.  For example, since the prime divisors of 45 are 3
and 5,
.45/D45

1
1
3

1
1
5

D45

2
3

4
5

D24 :
Ifpis prime, thenZ

p
D
f
1;2;:::;p1
g
,and
.p/Dp

1
1
p

Dp1:(31.21)
Ifnis composite, then.n/ < n1, although it can be shown that
.n/ >
n
e

ln lnnC
3
ln lnn
(31.22)
forn3,where
D0:5772156649 : : :isEuler’s constant. A somewhat simpler
(but looser) lower bound forn>5is
.n/ >
n
6ln lnn
:(31.23)
The lower bound (31.22) is essentially the best possible, since
lim inf
n!1
.n/
n=ln lnn
De

:(31.24)
Subgroups
If.S; ̊/is a group,S
0
S,and.S
0
; ̊/is also a group, then.S
0
; ̊/is asubgroup
of.S; ̊/. For example, the even integers form a subgroup of the integers under the
operation of addition. The following theorem provides a useful tool for recognizing
subgroups.

944Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Theorem 31.14 (A nonempty closed subset of a finite group is a subgroup)
If.S; ̊/is a finite group andS
0
is any nonempty subset ofSsuch thata ̊b2S
0
for alla; b2S
0
,then.S
0
; ̊/is a subgroup of.S; ̊/.
ProofWe leave the proof as Exercise 31.3-3.
For example, the set
f
0; 2; 4; 6
g
forms a subgroup ofZ
8
, since it is nonempty
and closed under the operationC(that is, it is closed underC
8
).
The following theorem provides an extremely useful constraint on the size of a
subgroup; we omit the proof.
Theorem 31.15 (Lagrange’s theorem)
If.S; ̊/is a finite group and.S
0
; ̊/is a subgroup of.S; ̊/,then
j
S
0
j
is a divisor
of
j
S
j
.
A subgroupS
0
of a groupSis apropersubgroup ifS
0
¤S.  We shall use the
following corollary in our analysis in Section 31.8 of the Miller-Rabin primality
test procedure.
Corollary 31.16
IfS
0
is a proper subgroup of a finite groupS,then
j
S
0
j

j
S
j
=2.
Subgroups generated by an element
Theorem 31.14 gives us an easy way to produce a subgroup of a finite group.S; ̊/:
choose an elementaand take all elements that can be generated fromausing the
group operation. Specifically, definea
.k/
fork1by
a
.k/
D
k
M
iD1
aDa ̊a ̊ ̊a
œ
k
:
Forexample,ifwetakeaD2in the groupZ
6
, the sequencea
.1/
;a
.2/
;a
.3/
;:::is
2; 4; 0; 2; 4; 0; 2; 4; 0; : : :  :
In the groupZ
n
,wehavea
.k/
Dkamodn, and in the groupZ

n
,wehavea
.k/
D
a
k
modn.Wedefinethesubgroup generated bya, denotedhaior.hai; ̊/,by
haiDfa
.k/
Wk1g:
We say thatageneratesthe subgrouphaior thatais ageneratorofhai.SinceSis
finite,haiis a finite subset ofS, possibly including all ofS. Since the associativity
of ̊implies

31.3Modular arithmetic945
a
.i /
 ̊a
.j /
Da
.iCj/
;
haiis closed and therefore, by Theorem 31.14,haiis a subgroup ofS. For example,
inZ
6
,wehave
h0iD
f
0
g
;
h1iD
f
0; 1; 2; 3; 4; 5
g
;
h2iD
f
0; 2; 4
g
:
Similarly, inZ

7
,wehave
h1iD
f
1
g
;
h2iD
f
1; 2; 4
g
;
h3iD
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
:
Theorderofa(in the groupS), denoted ord.a/, is defined as the smallest posi-
tive integertsuch thata
.t /
De.
Theorem 31.17
For any finite group.S; ̊/and anya2S, the order ofais equal to the size of the
subgroup it generates, or ord.a/D
j
hai
j
.
ProofLettDord.a/.Sincea
.t /
Deanda
.tCk/
Da
.t /
 ̊a
.k/
Da
.k/
for
k1,ifi>t,thena
.i /
Da
.j /
for somej<i.   Thus,  as we generate  ele-
ments bya, we see no new elements aftera
.t /
.  Thus,haiDfa
.1/
;a
.2/
;:::;a
.t /
g,
and so
j
hai
j
t.  To show that
j
hai
j
t, we show that each element of the se-
quencea
.1/
;a
.2/
;:::;a
.t /
is distinct. Suppose for the purpose of contradiction that
a
.i /
Da
.j /
for someiandjsatisfying1i<jt.  Then,a
.iCk/
Da
.jCk/
fork0.  But this equality implies thata
.iC.tj//
Da
.jC.tj//
De, a contradic-
tion, sinceiC.tj/ < tbuttis the least positive value such thata
.t /
De.There-
fore, each element of the sequencea
.1/
;a
.2/
;:::;a
.t /
is distinct, and
j
hai
j
t.We
conclude that ord.a/D
j
hai
j
.
Corollary 31.18
The sequencea
.1/
;a
.2/
;:::is periodic with periodtDord.a/;thatis,a
.i /
Da
.j /
if and only ifij.modt/.
Consistent  with  the  above  corollary,  we definea
.0/
aseanda
.i /
asa
.imodt/
,
wheretDord.a/, for all integersi.
Corollary 31.19
If.S; ̊/is a finite group with identitye, then for alla2S,
a
.jSj/
De:

946Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
ProofLagrange’s  theorem  (Theorem  31.15)  implies  that  ord.a/j
j
S
j
,andso
j
S
j
0.modt/,wheretDord.a/. Therefore,a
.jSj/
Da
.0/
De.
Exercises
31.3-1
Draw the group operation tables for the groups.Z
4
;C
4
/and.Z

5
;
5
/.  Show that
these groups are isomorphic by exhibiting a one-to-one correspondence ̨between
their elements such thataCbc.mod4/if and only if ̨.a/ ̨.b/ ̨.c/
.mod5/.
31.3-2
List all subgroups ofZ
9
and ofZ

13
.
31.3-3
Prove Theorem 31.14.
31.3-4
Show that ifpis prime andeis a positive integer, then
.p
e
/Dp
e1
.p1/ :
31.3-5
Show that for any integern>1and for anya2Z

n
, the functionf
a
WZ

n
!Z

n
defined byf
a
.x/Daxmodnis a permutation ofZ

n
.
31.4  Solving modular linear equations
We now consider the problem of finding solutions to the equation
axb.modn/ ;(31.25)
wherea>0andn>0.   This problem  has several  applications;  for  example,
we shall  use it  as part  of  the  procedure  for  finding  keys in the RSA public-key
cryptosystem in Section 31.7.  We assume thata,b,andnare given, and we wish
to find all values ofx, modulon, that satisfy equation (31.25).  The equation may
have zero, one, or more than one such solution.
Lethaidenote the subgroup ofZ
n
generated bya.SincehaiDfa
.x/
Wx>0gD
f
axmodnWx>0
g
, equation (31.25) has a solution if and only ifŒb2hai.La-
grange’s theorem (Theorem 31.15) tells us that
j
hai
j
must be a divisor ofn.The
following theorem gives us a precise characterization ofhai.

31.4Solving modular linear equations947
Theorem 31.20
For any positive integersaandn,ifdDgcd.a; n/,then
haiDhdiD
f
0; d; 2d; : : : ; ..n=d /1/d
g
(31.26)
inZ
n
, and thus
j
hai
j
Dn=d :
ProofWe begin by showing thatd2hai. Recall that E
XTENDED-EUCLID.a; n/
produces integersx
0
andy
0
such thatax
0
Cny
0
Dd. Thus,ax
0
d.modn/,so
thatd2hai. In other words,dis a multiple ofainZ
n
.
Sinced2hai, it follows that every multiple ofdbelongs tohai, because any
multiple of a multiple ofais itself a multiple ofa. Thus,haicontains every element
in
f
0; d; 2d; : : : ; ..n=d /1/d
g
.Thatis,hdihai.
We now  show  thathaihdi.Ifm2hai,thenmDaxmodnfor  some
integerx,andsomDaxCnyfor some integery.However,djaanddjn,and
sodjmby equation (31.4). Therefore,m2hdi.
Combining these results,  we have thathaiDhdi.  To see that
j
hai
j
Dn=d,
observe that there are exactlyn=dmultiples ofd
between0andn1,inclusive.
Corollary 31.21
The equationaxb.modn/is solvable for the unknownxif and only ifdjb,
wheredDgcd.a; n/.
ProofThe equationaxb.modn/is solvable if and only ifŒb2hai,which
is the same as saying
.bmodn/2
f
0; d; 2d; : : : ; ..n=d /1/d
g
;
by Theorem 31.20.  If0b<n,thenb2haiif and only ifdjb, since the
members ofhaiare precisely the multiples ofd.Ifb<0orbn, the corollary
then follows from the observation thatdjbif and only ifdj.bmodn/,sinceb
andbmodndiffer by a multiple ofn, which is itself a multiple ofd.
Corollary 31.22
The equationaxb.modn/either hasddistinct solutions modulon,where
dDgcd.a; n/, or it has no solutions.
ProofIfaxb.modn/has a solution,  thenb2hai.  By Theorem 31.17,
ord.a/D
j
hai
j
, and so Corollary 31.18 and Theorem 31.20 imply that the sequence
aimodn,foriD0; 1; : : :, is periodic with period
j
hai
j
Dn=d.Ifb2hai,thenb
appears exactlydtimes in the sequenceaimodn,foriD0; 1; : : : ; n1,since

948Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
the length-.n=d /block of valueshairepeats exactlydtimes asiincreases from0
ton1. The indicesxof thedpositions for whichaxmodnDbare the solutions
of the equationaxb.modn/.
Theorem 31.23
LetdDgcd.a; n/, and suppose thatdDax
0
Cny
0
for some integersx
0
andy
0
(for example, as computed by EXTENDED-EUCLID).  Ifdjb, then the equation
axb.modn/has as one of its solutions the valuex
0
,where
x
0
Dx
0
.b=d /modn:
ProofWe have
ax
0
ax
0
.b=d /  .modn/
d.b=d/.modn/(becauseax
0
d.modn/)
b.modn/ ;
and thusx
0
is a solution toaxb.modn/.
Theorem 31.24
Suppose  that  the  equationaxb.modn/is solvable  (that  is,djb,where
dDgcd.a; n/)andthatx
0
is  any  solution  to  this  equation.   Then,  this  equa-
tion has exactlyddistinct solutions,  modulon,givenbyx
i
Dx
0
Ci.n=d /for
iD0; 1; : : : ; d1.
ProofBecausen=d  >  0and0i.n=d /  <  nforiD0; 1; : : : ; d1,the
valuesx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
d1
are all distinct, modulon.Sincex
0
is a solution ofaxb
.modn/,wehaveax
0
modnb.modn/.  Thus, foriD0; 1; : : : ; d1,we
have
ax
i
modnDa.x
0
Cin=d/modn
D.ax
0
Cain=d/modn
Dax
0
modn(becausedjaimplies thatain=dis a multiple ofn)
b.modn/ ;
and henceax
i
b.modn/,makingx
i
a solution, too.  By Corollary 31.22, the
equationaxb.modn/has exactlydsolutions, so thatx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
d1
must
be all of them.
We have now developed the mathematics needed to solve the equationaxb
.modn/; the following algorithm prints all solutions to this equation.  The inputs
aandnare arbitrary positive integers, andbis an arbitrary integer.

31.4Solving modular linear equations949
MODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER.a;b;n/
1.d; x
0
;y
0
/DEXTENDED-EUCLID.a; n/
2ifdjb
3x
0
Dx
0
.b=d /modn
4foriD0tod1
5print.x
0
Ci.n=d //modn
6elseprint “no solutions”
As an example of the operation of this procedure, consider the equation14x
30  .mod100/(here,aD14,bD30,andnD100).   Calling  E
XTENDED-
E
UCLIDin  line  1,  we  obtain.d; x
0
;y
0
/D.2;7; 1/.Since2j30,  lines  3–5
execute.  Line 3 computesx
0
D.7/.15/mod100D95.  The loop on lines 4–5
prints the two solutions 95 and 45.
The  procedure  M
ODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVERworks  as  follows.
Line 1 computesdDgcd.a; n/, along with two valuesx
0
andy
0
such thatdD
ax
0
Cny
0
, demonstrating thatx
0
is a solution to the equationax
0
d.modn/.
Ifddoes not divideb, then the equationaxb.modn/has no solution,  by
Corollary 31.21. Line 2 checks to see whetherdjb; if not, line 6 reports that there
are no solutions.  Otherwise, line 3 computes a solutionx
0
toaxb.modn/,
in accordance with Theorem 31.23. Given one solution, Theorem 31.24 states that
adding multiples of.n=d /, modulon, yields the otherd1solutions.  Thefor
loop  of  lines  4–5 prints  out  alldsolutions,  beginning  withx
0
and spacedn=d
apart, modulon.
M
ODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVERperformsO.lgnCgcd.a; n//arith-
metic operations,  since E
XTENDED-EUCLIDperformsO.lgn/arithmetic opera-
tions, and each iteration of theforloop of lines 4–5 performs a constant number of
arithmetic operations.
The following  corollaries  of  Theorem  31.24  give specializations  of  particular
interest.
Corollary 31.25
For anyn>1,ifgcd.a; n/D1, then the equationaxb.modn/has a unique
solution, modulon.
IfbD1, a common case of considerable interest, thexwe are looking for is a
multiplicative inverseofa, modulon.
Corollary 31.26
For anyn>1,ifgcd.a; n/D1, then the equationax1.modn/has a unique
solution, modulon. Otherwise, it has no solution.

950Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Thanks to Corollary 31.26, we can use the notationa
1
modnto refer tothe
multiplicative  inverse  ofa,  modulon,whenaandnare  relatively  prime.   If
gcd.a; n/D1, then the unique solution to the equationax1.modn/is the
integerxreturned by E
XTENDED-EUCLID, since the equation
gcd.a; n/D1DaxCny
impliesax1.modn/.   Thus,  we can  computea
1
modnefficiently  using
E
XTENDED-EUCLID.
Exercises
31.4-1
Find all solutions to the equation35x10  .mod50/.
31.4-2
Prove that  the  equationaxay  .modn/impliesxy.modn/whenever
gcd.a; n/D1. Show that the condition gcd.a; n/D1is necessary by supplying a
counterexample with gcd.a; n/ > 1.
31.4-3
Consider  the  following  change  to  line  3  of  the  procedure  M
ODULAR-LINEAR-
E
QUATION-SOLVER:
3x
0
Dx
0
.b=d /mod.n=d /
Will this work? Explain why or why not.
31.4-4?
Letpbe  prime  andf.x/f
0
Cf
1
xCCf
t
x
t
.modp/be  a  polyno-
mial  of  degreet,  with  coefficientsf
i
drawn  fromZ
p
.   We  say  thata2Z
p
is  azerooffiff.a/0.modp/.    Prove  that  ifais  a  zero  off,then
f.x/.xa/g.x/  .modp/for some polynomialg.x/of degreet1.  Prove
by induction ontthat ifpis prime, then a polynomialf.x/of degreetcan have
at mosttdistinct zeros modulop.
31.5  The Chinese remainder theorem
AroundA.D. 100, the Chinese mathematician Sun-Ts  ̆u solved the problem of find-
ing those integersxthat leave remainders 2, 3, and 2 when divided by 3, 5, and 7
respectively. One such solution isxD23; all solutions are of the form23C105k

31.5The Chinese remainder theorem951
for arbitrary integersk.  The “Chinese remainder theorem” provides a correspon-
dence  between  a system  of  equations  modulo  a set  of  pairwise  relatively  prime
moduli (for example, 3, 5, and 7) and an equation modulo their product (for exam-
ple, 105).
The  Chinese  remainder  theorem  has  two  major  applications.Let  the  inte-
gernbe factored asnDn
1
n
2
n
k
, where the factorsn
i
are pairwise relatively
prime.  First, the Chinese remainder theorem is a descriptive “structure theorem”
that  describes  the  structure  ofZ
n
as  identical  to  that  of  the  Cartesian  product
Z
n
1
	Z
n
2
		Z
n
k
with componentwise addition and multiplication modulon
i
in theith component.  Second, this description helps us to design efficient algo-
rithms, since working in each of the systemsZ
n
i
can be more efficient (in terms of
bit operations) than working modulon.
Theorem 31.27 (Chinese remainder theorem)
LetnDn
1
n
2
n
k
,  where  then
i
are  pairwise  relatively  prime.   Consider  the
correspondence
a$.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
k
/;(31.27)
wherea2Z
n
,a
i
2Z
n
i
,and
a
i
Damodn
i
foriD1;2;:::;k. Then, mapping (31.27) is a one-to-one correspondence (bijec-
tion) betweenZ
n
and the Cartesian productZ
n
1
	Z
n
2
		Z
n
k
. Operations per-
formed on the elements ofZ
n
can be equivalently performed on the corresponding
k-tuples by performing the operations independently in each coordinate position in
the appropriate system. That is, if
a$.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
k
/;
b$.b
1
;b
2
;:::;b
k
/;
then
.aCb/modn$..a
1
Cb
1
/modn
1
;:::;.a
k
Cb
k
/modn
k
/;(31.28)
.ab/modn$..a
1
b
1
/modn
1
;:::;.a
k
b
k
/modn
k
/;(31.29)
.ab/modn$.a
1
b
1
modn
1
;:::;a
k
b
k
modn
k
/:(31.30)
ProofTransforming  between  the  two  representations  is  fairly  straightforward.
Going fromato.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
k
/is quite easy and requires onlyk“mod” opera-
tions.
Computingafrom inputs.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
k
/is a bit more complicated.  We begin
by definingm
i
Dn=n
i
foriD1;2;:::;k; thusm
i
is the product of all of then
j
’s
other thann
i
:m
i
Dn
1
n
2
n
i1
n
iC1
n
k
.Wenextdefine

952Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
c
i
Dm
i
.m
1
i
modn
i
/(31.31)
foriD1;2;:::;k.  Equation (31.31) is always well defined:  sincem
i
andn
i
are
relatively prime (by Theorem 31.6), Corollary 31.26 guarantees thatm
1
i
modn
i
exists. Finally, we can computeaasafunctionofa
1
,a
2
, ...,a
k
as follows:
a.a
1
c
1
Ca
2
c
2
CCa
k
c
k
/.modn/ :(31.32)
We  now  show  that  equation  (31.32)  ensures  thataa
i
.modn
i
/foriD
1;2;:::;k.  Note that ifj¤i,thenm
j
0.modn
i
/, which implies thatc
j

m
j
0.modn
i
/.  Note also thatc
i
1.modn
i
/, from equation (31.31).  We
thus have the appealing and useful correspondence
c
i
$.0;0;:::;0;1;0;:::;0/ ;
a vector that has0s everywhere except in theith coordinate, where it has a1;thec
i
thus form a “basis” for the representation, in a certain sense. For eachi, therefore,
we have
aa
i
c
i
.modn
i
/
a
i
m
i
.m
1
i
modn
i
/.modn
i
/
a
i
.modn
i
/;
which is what we wished to show:  our method of computingafrom thea
i
’s pro-
duces a resultathat satisfies the constraintsaa
i
.modn
i
/foriD1;2;:::;k.
The  correspondence  is  one-to-one,  since  we  can  transform  in  both  directions.
Finally,  equations  (31.28)–(31.30)  follow  directly  from  Exercise  31.1-7,  since
xmodn
i
D.xmodn/modn
i
for anyxandiD1;2;:::;k.
We shall use the following corollaries later in this chapter.
Corollary 31.28
Ifn
1
;n
2
;:::;n
k
are pairwise relatively prime andnDn
1
n
2
n
k
, then for any
integersa
1
;a
2
;:::;a
k
, the set of simultaneous equations
xa
i
.modn
i
/;
foriD1;2;:::;k, has a unique solution modulonfor the unknownx.
Corollary 31.29
Ifn
1
;n
2
;:::;n
k
are pairwise  relatively  prime andnDn
1
n
2
n
k
,  then for all
integersxanda,
xa.modn
i
/
foriD1;2;:::;kif and only if
xa.modn/ :

31.5The Chinese remainder theorem953
0123456789101112
00 40155530 5 45206035105025
1
26 1 41165631 6 462161361151
2
522724217573274722623712
3
135328 3 43185833 8 48236338
4
391454294441959349492464
Figure 31.3An illustration of the Chinese remainder theorem forn
1
D5andn
2
D13.  For this
example,c
1
D26andc
2
D40.Inrowi,  columnjis shown  the  value  ofa,  modulo 65,  such
thatamod5Diandamod13Dj.  Note that row 0, column 0 contains a 0.  Similarly, row 4,
column 12 contains a 64 (equivalent to1). Sincec
1
D26, moving down a row increasesaby26.
Similarly,c
2
D40means  that moving  right by a  column increasesaby40.   Increasingaby1
corresponds to moving diagonally downward and to the right, wrapping around from the bottom to
the top and from the right to the left.
As an example of the application of the Chinese remainder theorem, suppose we
are given the two equations
a2.mod5/ ;
a3.mod13/ ;
so  thata
1
D2,n
1
Dm
2
D5,a
2
D3,andn
2
Dm
1
D13,  and  we  wish
to computeamod65,sincenDn
1
n
2
D65.  Because13
1
2.mod5/and
5
1
8.mod13/,wehave
c
1
D13.2mod5/D26 ;
c
2
D5.8mod13/D40 ;
and
a226C340  .mod65/
52C120.mod65/
42.mod65/ :
See Figure 31.3 for an illustration of the Chinese remainder theorem, modulo65.
Thus, we can work modulonby working modulondirectly or by working in the
transformed representation using separate modulon
i
computations, as convenient.
The computations are entirely equivalent.
Exercises
31.5-1
Find all solutions to the e
quationsx4.mod5/andx5.mod11/.

954Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
31.5-2
Find all integersxthat leave remainders 1, 2, 3 when divided by 9, 8, 7 respectively.
31.5-3
Argue that, under the definitions of Theorem 31.27, if gcd.a; n/D1,then
.a
1
modn/$..a
1
1
modn
1
/; .a
1
2
modn
2
/;:::;.a
1
k
modn
k
// :
31.5-4
Under the definitions of Theorem 31.27, prove that for any polynomialf, the num-
ber of roots of the equationf.x/0.modn/equals the product of the number
of roots of each of the equationsf.x/0.modn
1
/,f.x/0.modn
2
/, ...,
f.x/0.modn
k
/.
31.6  Powers of an element
Just as we often consider the multiples of a given elementa, modulon, we consider
the sequence of powers ofa, modulon,wherea2Z

n
:
a
0
;a
1
;a
2
;a
3
;:::;(31.33)
modulon.  Indexing from0,the0th value in this sequence isa
0
modnD1,and
theith value isa
i
modn. For example, the powers of3modulo7are
i01234567891011
3
i
mod71326451326 4  5
whereas the powers of2modulo7are
i01234567891011
2
i
mod71241241241 2  4
In this section,  lethaidenote the subgroup ofZ

n
generated byaby repeated
multiplication, and let ord
n
.a/(the “order ofa, modulon”) denote the order ofa
inZ

n
. For example,h2iD
f
1; 2; 4
g
inZ

7
, and ord
7
.2/D3. Using the definition of
the Euler phi function.n/as the size ofZ

n
(see Section 31.3), we now translate
Corollary 31.19 into the notation ofZ

n
to obtain Euler’s theorem and specialize it
toZ

p
,wherepis prime, to obtain Fermat’s theorem.
Theorem 31.30 (Euler’s theorem)
For any integern>1,
a
.n/
1.modn/for alla2Z

n
:

31.6Powers of an element955
Theorem 31.31 (Fermat’s theorem)
Ifpis prime, then
a
p1
1.modp/for alla2Z

p
:
ProofBy equation (31.21),.p/Dp1ifpis prime.
Fermat’s theorem applies to every element inZ
p
except0,since062Z

p
.Forall
a2Z
p
, however, we havea
p
a.modp/ifpis prime.
If ord
n
.g/D
j
Z

n
j
, then every element inZ

n
isapowerofg, modulon,and
gis aprimitive rootor  ageneratorofZ

n
.   For example,3is a primitive  root,
modulo7,but2is not  a primitive  root,  modulo7.IfZ

n
possesses  a primitive
root, the groupZ

n
iscyclic. We omit the proof of the following theorem, which is
proven by Niven and Zuckerman [265].
Theorem 31.32
The values ofn>1for whichZ

n
is cyclic are2,4,p
e
,and2p
e
, for all primes
p>2and all positive integerse.
Ifgis a primitive root ofZ

n
andais any element ofZ

n
, then there exists a ́such
thatg
 ́
a.modn/.This ́is adiscrete logarithmor anindexofa, modulon,
to the baseg; we denote this value as ind
n;g
.a/.
Theorem 31.33 (Discrete logarithm theorem)
Ifgis a primitive root ofZ

n
, then the equationg
x
g
y
.modn/holds if and
only if the equationxy.mod.n//holds.
ProofSuppose first thatxy.mod.n//.  Then,xDyCk.n/for some
integerk. Therefore,
g
x
g
yCk.n/
.modn/
g
y
.g
.n/
/
k
.modn/
g
y
1
k
.modn/(by Euler’s theorem)
g
y
.modn/ :
Conversely, suppose thatg
x
g
y
.modn/. Because the sequence of powers ofg
generates  every element  ofhgiand
j
hgi
j
D.n/,  Corollary  31.18  implies that
the sequence of powers ofgis periodic with period.n/.  Therefore, ifg
x
g
y
.modn/, then we must havexy.mod.n//.
We now turn our attention to the square roots of1, modulo a prime power.  The
following theorem will be useful in our development of a primality-testing  algo-
rithm in Section 31.8.

956Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Theorem 31.34
Ifpis an odd prime ande1, then the equation
x
2
1.modp
e
/(31.34)
has only two solutions, namelyxD1andxD1.
ProofEquation (31.34) is equivalent to
p
e
j.x1/.xC1/ :
Sincep>2, we can havepj.x1/orpj.xC1/, but not both.  (Otherwise,
by property (31.3),pwould also divide their difference.xC1/.x1/D2.)
Ifp−.x1/,thengcd.p
e
;x1/D1, and by Corollary 31.5, we would have
p
e
j.xC1/.Thatis,x1.modp
e
/.   Symmetrically,  ifp−.xC1/,
then  gcd.p
e
;xC1/D1,  and Corollary  31.5 implies  thatp
e
j.x1/,sothat
x1.modp
e
/. Therefore, eitherx1.modp
e
/orx1.modp
e
/.
A numberxis anontrivial square root of 1, modulon, if it satisfies the equation
x
2
1.modn/butxis equivalent to neither of the two “trivial” square roots:
1or1, modulon.  For example,6is a nontrivial  square root of1, modulo35.
We shall use the following corollary to Theorem 31.34 in the correctness proof in
Section 31.8 for the Miller-Rabin primality-testing procedure.
Corollary 31.35
If there exists a nontrivial square root of1, modulon,thennis composite.
ProofBy the contrapositive of Theorem 31.34, if there exists a nontrivial square
root of1, modulon,thenncannot be an odd prime or a power of an odd prime.
Ifx
2
1.mod2/,thenx1.mod2/, and so all square roots of1, modulo2,
are trivial.  Thus,ncannot be prime.  Finally, we must haven>1for a nontrivial
square root of1to exist. Therefore,nmust be composite.
Raising to powers with repeated squaring
A frequently occurring operation in number-theoretic computations is raising one
number to a power modulo another number, also known asmodular exponentia-
tion. More precisely, we would like an efficient way to computea
b
modn,where
aandbare nonnegative integers andnis a positive integer.  Modular exponenti-
ation is an essential operation in many primality-testing routines and in the RSA
public-key cryptosystem.  The method ofrepeated squaringsolves this problem
efficiently using the binary representation ofb.
Lethb
k
;b
k1
;:::;b
1
;b
0
ibe the binary representation ofb. (That is, the binary
representation iskC1bits long,b
k
is the most significant bit, andb
0
is the least

31.6Powers of an element957
i
9876543210
b
i
1000110000
c
1248173570140280560
d
749157526160241298166671
Figure 31.4The results of M
ODULAR-EXPONENTIATIONwhen computinga
b
.modn/,where
aD7,bD560Dh1000110000i,andnD561.  The values are shown after each execution of the
forloop. The final result is1.
significant bit.)  The following procedure computesa
c
modnascis increased by
doublings and incrementations from0tob.
M
ODULAR-EXPONENTIATION.a;b;n/
1cD0
2dD1
3lethb
k
;b
k1
;:::;b
0
ibe the binary representation ofb
4foriDkdownto0
5cD2c
6dD.dd/modn
7ifb
i
==1
8cDcC1
9dD.da/modn
10returnd
The essential use of squaring in line 6 of each iteration explains the name “repeated
squaring.”   As an example,  foraD7,bD560,andnD561,  the algorithm
computes the sequence of values modulo 561 shown in Figure 31.4; the sequence
of exponents used appears in the row of the table labeled byc.
The variablecis not really needed by the algorithm but is included for the fol-
lowing two-part loop invariant:
Just prior to each iteration of theforloop of lines 4–9,
1. The value ofcis the same as the prefixhb
k
;b
k1
;:::;b
iC1
iof the binary
representation ofb,and
2.dDa
c
modn.
We use this loop invariant as follows:
Initialization:Initially,iDk, so that the prefixhb
k
;b
k1
; :::; b
iC1
iis empty,
which corresponds tocD0. Moreover,dD1Da
0
modn.

958Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Maintenance:Letc
0
andd
0
denote the values ofcanddat the end of an iteration
of theforloop, and thus the values prior to the next iteration.  Each iteration
updatesc
0
D2c(ifb
i
D0)orc
0
D2cC1(ifb
i
D1), so thatcwill be correct
prior to the next iteration.  Ifb
i
D0,thend
0
Dd
2
modnD.a
c
/
2
modnD
a
2c
modnDa
c
0
modn.Ifb
i
D1,thend
0
Dd
2
amodnD.a
c
/
2
amodnD
a
2cC1
modnDa
c
0
modn.   In either case,dDa
c
modnprior  to the next
iteration.
Termination:At termination,iD1.  Thus,cDb,sincechas the value of the
prefixhb
k
;b
k1
;:::;b
0
iofb’s binary representation.  HencedDa
c
modnD
a
b
modn.
If  the  inputsa,b,andnareˇ-bit  numbers,  then  the  total  number  of  arith-
metic operations required isO.ˇ/and the total number of bit operations required
isO.ˇ
3
/.
Exercises
31.6-1
Draw a table showing the order of every element inZ

11
. Pick the smallest primitive
rootgand compute a table giving ind
11;g
.x/for allx2Z

11
.
31.6-2
Give a modular exponentiation algorithm that examines the bits ofbfrom right to
left instead of left to right.
31.6-3
Assuming that you know.n/, explain how to computea
1
modnfor anya2Z

n
using the procedure MODULAR-EXPONENTIATION.
31.7  The RSA public-key cryptosystem
With a public-key cryptosystem, we can encrypt messages sent between two com-
municating parties so that an eavesdropper who overhears the encrypted messages
will not be able to decode them.  A public-key cryptosystem also enables a party
to append an unforgeable “digital signature” to the end of an electronic message.
Such a signature is the electronic version of a handwritten signature on a paper doc-
ument. It can be easily checked by anyone, forged by no one, yet loses its validity
if any bit of the message is altered. It therefore provides authentication of both the
identity of the signer and the contents of the signed message.  It is the perfect tool

31.7The RSA public-key cryptosystem959
for electronically signed business contracts, electronic checks, electronic purchase
orders, and other electronic communications that parties wish to authenticate.
The RSA public-key cryptosystem relies on the dramatic difference between the
ease of finding large prime numbers and the difficulty of factoring the product of
two large prime numbers. Section 31.8 describes an efficient procedure for finding
large prime numbers,  and Section  31.9 discusses  the problem  of factoring  large
integers.
Public-key cryptosystems
In a public-key cryptosystem, each participant has both apublic keyand asecret
key.  Each key is a piece of information.  For example, in the RSA cryptosystem,
each key consists  of a pair  of integers.   The participants  “Alice” and “Bob”  are
traditionally  used  in  cryptography  examples;  we  denote  their  public  and  secret
keys asP
A
,S
A
for Alice andP
B
,S
B
for Bob.
Each participant creates his or her own public and secret keys.  Secret keys are
kept secret, but public keys can be revealed to anyone or even published.  In fact,
it is often convenient  to assume that everyone’s public key is available in a pub-
lic directory, so that any participant can easily obtain the public key of any other
participant.
The public and secret keys specify functions that can be applied to any message.
LetDdenote the set of permissible messages. For example,Dmight be the set of
all finite-length bit sequences. In the simplest, and original, formulation of public-
key cryptography,  we require that  the public  and secret  keys specify  one-to-one
functions fromDto itself. We denote the function corresponding to Alice’s public
keyP
A
byP
A
./and the function corresponding to her secret keyS
A
byS
A
./.The
functionsP
A
./andS
A
./are thus permutations ofD. We assume that the functions
P
A
./andS
A
./are efficiently computable given the corresponding keyP
A
orS
A
.
The public and secret keys for any participant are a “matched pair” in that they
specify functions that are inverses of each other. That is,
MDS
A
.P
A
.M // ;(31.35)
MDP
A
.S
A
.M //(31.36)
for any messageM2D.  TransformingMwith the two keysP
A
andS
A
succes-
sively, in either order, yields the messageMback.
In a public-key cryptosystem, we require that no one but Alice be able to com-
pute the functionS
A
./in any practical amount of time. This assumption is crucial
to keeping encrypted mail sent to Alice private and to knowing that Alice’s digi-
tal signatures are authentic.  Alice must keepS
A
secret; if she does not, she loses
her uniqueness and the cryptosystem cannot provide her with unique capabilities.
The assumption that only Alice can computeS
A
./must hold even though everyone

960Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
decrypt
communication channel
encrypt
BobAlice
eavesdropper
MM
P
A
S
A
C
CDP
A
.M /
Figure 31.5Encryption in a public key system. Bob encrypts the messageMusing Alice’s public
keyP
A
and transmits the resulting ciphertextCDP
A
.M /over a communication channel to Al-
ice.  An eavesdropper who captures the transmitted ciphertext gains no information aboutM.  Alice
receivesCand decrypts it using her secret key to obtain the original messageMDS
A
.C /.
knowsP
A
and can computeP
A
./, the inverse function toS
A
./, efficiently. In order
to design a workable public-key cryptosystem,  we must figure out how to create
a system in which we can reveal a transformationP
A
./without thereby revealing
how to compute the corresponding inverse transformationS
A
./. This task appears
formidable, but we shall see how to accomplish it.
In a public-key cryptosystem, encryption works as shown in Figure 31.5.  Sup-
pose Bob wishes to send Alice a messageMencrypted  so that it will look like
unintelligible gibberish to an eavesdropper.  The scenario for sending the message
goes as follows.

Bob obtains  Alice’s  public  keyP
A
(from  a public  directory  or directly  from
Alice).

Bob computes theciphertextCDP
A
.M /corresponding  to the messageM
and sendsCto Alice.

When Alice receives the ciphertextC, she applies her secret keyS
A
to retrieve
the original message:S
A
.C /DS
A
.P
A
.M //DM.
BecauseS
A
./andP
A
./are inverse functions, Alice can computeMfromC.Be-
cause only Alice is able to computeS
A
./, Alice is the only one who can computeM
fromC. Because Bob encryptsMusingP
A
./, only Alice can understand the trans-
mitted message.
We can just as easily implement digital signatures within our formulation of a
public-key  cryptosystem.   (There are other  ways of approaching  the problem  of
constructing digital signatures, but we shall not go into them here.)  Suppose now
that Alice wishes to send Bob a digitally signed responseM
0
.  Figure 31.6 shows
how the digital-signature scenario proceeds.

Alice computes herdigital signature	for the messageM
0
using her secret
keyS
A
and the equation	DS
A
.M
0
/.

31.7The RSA public-key cryptosystem961
sign
communication channel
verify
=?
accept
BobAlice
M
0
M
0
P
A
S
A
	
.M
0
;	/
	DS
A
.M
0
/
Figure 31.6Digital signatures in a public-key system.  Alice signs the messageM
0
by appending
her digital signature	DS
A
.M
0
/to it.  She transmits the message/signature pair.M
0
;	/to Bob,
who verifies it by checking the equationM
0
DP
A
.	 /. If the equation holds, he accepts.M
0
;	/as
a message that Alice has signed.

Alice sends the message/signature pair.M
0
;	/to Bob.

When Bob receives.M
0
;	/, he can verify that it originated from Alice by us-
ing Alice’s public key to verify the equationM
0
DP
A
.	 /.  (Presumably,M
0
contains Alice’s name, so Bob knows whose public key to use.) If the equation
holds, then Bob concludes that the messageM
0
was actually signed by Alice.
If the equation fails to hold, Bob concludes either that the messageM
0
or the
digital signature	was corrupted by transmission errors or that the pair.M
0
;	/
is an attempted forgery.
Because a digital signature provides both authentication of the signer’s identity and
authentication of the contents of the signed message, it is analogous to a handwrit-
ten signature at the end of a written document.
A digital signature must be verifiable by anyone who has access to the signer’s
public key.  A signed message can be verified by one party and then passed on to
other parties who can also verify the signature.  For example, the message might
be an electronic check from Alice to Bob.  After Bob verifies Alice’s signature on
the check, he can give the check to his bank, who can then also verify the signature
and effect the appropriate funds transfer.
A signed message is not necessarily encrypted; the message can be “in the clear”
and not protected from disclosure.  By composing the above protocols for encryp-
tion and for signatures, we can create messages that are both signed and encrypted.
The signer first appends his or her digital signature to the message and then en-
crypts the resulting message/signature pair with the public key of the intended re-
cipient.  The recipient decrypts the received message with his or her secret key to
obtain both the original message and its digital signature.  The recipient can then
verify the signature using the public key of the signer.  The corresponding  com-
bined process using paper-based systems would be to sign the paper document and

962Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
then seal the document inside a paper envelope that is opened only by the intended
recipient.
The RSA cryptosystem
In theRSA public-key cryptosystem,  a participant  creates  his or  her  public  and
secret keys with the following procedure:
1.   Select at random two large prime numberspandqsuch thatp¤q. The primes
pandqmight be, say,1024bits each.
2.   ComputenDpq.
3.   Select a small odd integerethat is relatively prime to.n/, which, by equa-
tion (31.20), equals.p1/.q1/.
4.   Computedas the multiplicative inverse ofe, modulo.n/.  (Corollary 31.26
guarantees thatdexists and is uniquely defined.  We can use the technique of
Section 31.4 to computed,giveneand.n/.)
5.   Publish the pairPD.e; n/as the participant’sRSA public key.
6.   Keep secret the pairSD.d; n/as the participant’sRSA secret key.
For this scheme, the domainDis the setZ
n
.  To transform a messageMasso-
ciated with a public keyPD.e; n/, compute
P.M/DM
e
modn:(31.37)
To transform a ciphertextCassociated with a secret keySD.d; n/, compute
S.C /DC
d
modn:(31.38)
These equations apply to both encryption and signatures. To create a signature, the
signer applies his or her secret key to the message to be signed,  rather than to a
ciphertext. To verify a signature, the public key of the signer is applied to it, rather
than to a message to be encrypted.
We can implement the public-key and secret-key operations using the procedure
M
ODULAR-EXPONENTIATIONdescribed in Section 31.6. To analyze the running
time of these operations,  assume that the public key.e; n/and secret key.d; n/
satisfy lgeDO.1/,lgdˇ,andlgnˇ. Then, applying a public key requires
O.1/modular multiplications  and usesO.ˇ
2
/bit operations.  Applying a secret
key requiresO.ˇ/modular multiplications, usingO.ˇ
3
/bit operations.
Theorem 31.36 (Correctness of RSA)
The RSA equations (31.37) and (31.38) define inverse transformations ofZ
n
satis-
fying equations (31.35) and (31.36).

31.7The RSA public-key cryptosystem963
ProofFrom equations (31.37) and (31.38), we have that for anyM2Z
n
,
P.S.M//DS.P.M //DM
ed
.modn/ :
Sinceeanddare multiplicative inverses modulo.n/D.p1/.q1/,
edD1Ck.p1/.q1/
for some integerk.Butthen,ifM60.modp/,wehave
M
ed
M.M
p1
/
k.q1/
.modp/
M..Mmodp/
p1
/
k.q1/
.modp/
M.1/
k.q1/
.modp/(by Theorem 31.31)
M.modp/ :
Also,M
ed
M.modp/ifM0.modp/. Thus,
M
ed
M.modp/
for allM. Similarly,
M
ed
M.modq/
for allM. Thus, by Corollary 31.29 to the Chinese remainder theorem,
M
ed
M.modn/
for allM.
The security of the RSA cryptosystem rests in large part on the difficulty of fac-
toring large integers. If an adversary can factor the modulusnin a public key, then
the adversary can derive the secret key from the public key, using the knowledge
of the factorspandqin the same way that the creator of the public key used them.
Therefore, if factoring large integers is easy, then breaking the RSA cryptosystem
is easy. The converse statement, that if factoring large integers is hard, then break-
ing RSA is hard, is unproven.  After two decades of research, however, no easier
method has been found to break the RSA public-key cryptosystem than to factor
the modulusn. And as we shall see in Section 31.9, factoring large integers is sur-
prisingly difficult.  By randomly selecting and multiplying together two1024-bit
primes, we can create a public key that cannot be “broken” in any feasible amount
of time with current technology.  In the absence of a fundamental breakthrough in
the design of number-theoretic algorithms, and when implemented with care fol-
lowing recommended standards, the RSA cryptosystem is capable of providing a
high degree of security in applications.
In order  to achieve  security  with the RSA cryptosystem,  however,  we should
use integers  that  are quite long—hundreds  or even more than one thousand  bits

964Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
long—to  resist  possible  advances  in  the  art  of  factoring.    At  the  time  of  this
writing (2009),  RSA  moduli  were  commonly  in  the  range  of  768  to  2048  bits.
To create moduli of such sizes,  we must be able to find large primes efficiently.
Section 31.8 addresses this problem.
For  efficiency,  RSA  is  often  used  in  a  “hybrid”  or  “key-management”  mode
with fast non-public-key cryptosystems.  With such a system, the encryption and
decryption keys are identical.  If Alice wishes to send a long messageMto Bob
privately, she selects a random keyKfor the fast non-public-key cryptosystem and
encryptsMusingK,  obtaining  ciphertextC.   Here,Cis as long asM,butK
is quite  short.   Then,  she encryptsKusing  Bob’s  public  RSA key.   SinceKis
short, computingP
B
.K/is fast (much faster than computingP
B
.M /).  She then
transmits.C; P
B
.K//to Bob, who decryptsP
B
.K/to obtainKand then usesK
to decryptC, obtainingM.
We  can  use  a  similar  hybrid  approach  to  make  digital  signatures  efficiently.
This approach combines RSA with a publiccollision-resistant hash functionh—a
function that is easy to compute but for which it is computationally infeasible to
find  two  messagesMandM
0
such  thath.M /Dh.M
0
/.Thevalueh.M /is
a short (say,  256-bit) “fingerprint”  of the messageM.  If Alice wishes to sign a
messageM, she first applieshtoMto obtain the fingerprinth.M /, which she
then encrypts with her secret key. She sends.M; S
A
.h.M ///to Bob as her signed
version  ofM.   Bob can verify  the  signature  by computingh.M /and verifying
thatP
A
applied toS
A
.h.M //as received equalsh.M /. Because no one can create
two messages with the same fingerprint, it is computationally infeasible to alter a
signed message and preserve the validity of the signature.
Finally, we note that the use ofcertificatesmakes distributing public keys much
easier.   For  example,  assume  there  is  a “trusted  authority”Twhose  public  key
is known by everyone.  Alice can obtain fromTa signed message (her certificate)
stating that “Alice’s public key isP
A
.” This certificate is “self-authenticating” since
everyone knowsP
T
.  Alice can include her certificate with her signed messages,
so that the recipient has Alice’s public key immediately available in order to verify
her signature.  Because her key was signed byT, the recipient knows that Alice’s
key is really Alice’s.
Exercises
31.7-1
Consider an RSA key set withpD11,qD29,nD319,andeD3.What
value ofdshould be used in the secret key? What is the encryption of the message
MD100?

31.8    Primality testing965
31.7-2
Prove that if Alice’s public exponenteis3and an adversary obtains Alice’s secret
exponentd,where0 < d < .n/, then the adversary can factor Alice’s modulusn
in time polynomial in the number of bits inn. (Although you are not asked to prove
it, you may be interested to know that this result remains true even if the condition
eD3is removed. See Miller [255].)
31.7-3?
Prove that RSA is multiplicative in the sense that
P
A
.M
1
/P
A
.M
2
/P
A
.M
1
M
2
/.modn/ :
Use this fact to prove that if an adversary had a procedure that could efficiently
decrypt 1 percent of messages fromZ
n
encrypted withP
A
, then he could employ
a probabilistic  algorithm to decrypt every message encrypted withP
A
with high
probability.
?31.8  Primality testing
In this section, we consider the problem of finding large primes.  We begin with a
discussion of the density of primes, proceed to examine a plausible, but incomplete,
approach to primality testing, and then present an effective randomized primality
test due to Miller and Rabin.
The density of prime numbers
For  many  applications,  such  as  cryptography,  we  need  to  find  large  “random”
primes.   Fortunately,  large  primes  are  not  too  rare,  so  that  it  is  feasible  to  test
random integers of the appropriate size until we find a prime. Theprime distribu-
tion function.n/specifies the number of primes that are less than or equal ton.
For example,.10/D4, since there are 4 prime numbers less than or equal to10,
namely, 2, 3, 5, and 7.  The prime number theorem gives a useful approximation
to.n/.
Theorem 31.37 (Prime number theorem)
lim
n!1
.n/
n=lnn
D1:
The  approximationn=lnngives  reasonably  accurate  estimates  of.n/even
for smalln.  For example,  it is off by less than6%atnD10
9
,where.n/D

966Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
50,847,534 andn=lnn48,254,942. (To a number theorist,10
9
isasmallnum-
ber.)
We can view the process  of  randomly selecting  an integernand determining
whether it is prime as a Bernoulli trial (see Section C.4).  By the prime number
theorem, the probability of a success—that is, the probability thatnis prime—is
approximately1=lnn. The geometric distribution tells us how many trials we need
to obtain a success,  and by equation (C.32), the expected number of trials is ap-
proximately lnn.  Thus, we would expect to examine approximately lnnintegers
chosen randomly nearnin order to find a prime that is of the same length asn.
For example,  we expect  that  finding  a1024-bit  prime would  require  testing  ap-
proximately ln2
1024
710randomly chosen1024-bit numbers for primality.  (Of
course, we can cut this figure in half by choosing only odd integers.)
In the remainder of this section, we consider the problem of determining whether
or not a large odd integernis prime. For notational convenience, we assume thatn
has the prime factorization
nDp
e
1
1
p
e
2
2
p
e
r
r
;(31.39)
wherer1,p
1
;p
2
;:::;p
r
are the prime factors ofn,ande
1
;e
2
;:::;e
r
are posi-
tive integers. The integernis prime if and only ifrD1ande
1
D1.
One simple approach to the problem of testing for primality istrial division.We
try dividingnby each integer2;3;:::;
b
p
n
c
.  (Again, we may skip even integers
greater than2.) It is easy to see thatnis prime if and only if none of the trial divi-
sors dividesn. Assuming that each trial division takes constant time, the worst-case
running time is‚.
p
n/, which is exponential in the length ofn.  (Recall that ifn
is encoded in binary usingˇbits, thenˇD
d
lg.nC1/
e
,andso
p
nD‚.2
ˇ=2
/.)
Thus, trial division works well only ifnis very small or happens to have a small
prime factor.  When it works, trial division has the advantage that it not only de-
termines whethernis prime or composite,  but also determines one ofn’s prime
factors ifnis composite.
In this section, we are interested only in finding out whether a given numbern
is prime;  ifnis composite,  we are not concerned  with finding its prime factor-
ization.  As we shall see in Section 31.9, computing the prime factorization  of a
number is computationally expensive. It is perhaps surprising that it is much easier
to tell whether or not a given number is prime than it is to determine the prime
factorization of the number if it is not prime.
Pseudoprimality testing
We now consider  a method for primality testing that “almost works” and in fact
is good enough for many practical applications.  Later on, we shall present a re-

31.8    Primality testing967
finement of this method that removes the small defect. LetZ
C
n
denote the nonzero
elements ofZ
n
:
Z
C
n
D
f
1;2;:::;n1
g
:
Ifnis prime, thenZ
C
n
DZ

n
.
We say thatnis abase-apseudoprimeifnis composite and
a
n1
1.modn/ :(31.40)
Fermat’s theorem (Theorem 31.31) implies that ifnis prime, thennsatisfies equa-
tion (31.40) for everyainZ
C
n
.  Thus, if we can find anya2Z
C
n
such thatndoes
notsatisfy equation (31.40), thennis certainly composite.  Surprisingly, the con-
versealmostholds, so that this criterion forms an almost perfect test for primality.
We test to see whethernsatisfies equation (31.40) foraD2. If not, we declaren
to be composite by returning
COMPOSITE.  Otherwise, we returnPRIME, guessing
thatnis prime (when,  in fact,  all we know is thatnis either prime or a base-2
pseudoprime).
The following procedure pretends in this manner to be checking the primality
ofn. It uses the procedure M
ODULAR-EXPONENTIATIONfrom Section 31.6. We
assume that the inputnis an odd integer greater than2.
P
SEUDOPRIME.n/
1ifM
ODULAR-EXPONENTIATION.2; n1; n/61.modn/
2return
COMPOSITE//definitely
3else return
PRIME//we hope!
This procedure  can make errors,  but  only of one type.   That is,  if it says thatn
is composite, then it is always correct.  If it says thatnis prime, however, then it
makes an error only ifnis a base-2pseudoprime.
How often does this procedure err? Surprisingly rarely. There are only 22 values
ofnless  than  10,000  for  which  it  errs;  the  first  four  such  values  are  341,  561,
645, and 1105.  We won’t prove it, but the probability that this program makes an
error on a randomly chosenˇ-bit number goes to zero asˇ!1.Usingmore
precise estimates due to Pomerance [279] of the number of base-2pseudoprimes of
a given size, we may estimate that a randomly chosen 512-bit number that is called
prime by the above procedure has less than one chance in10
20
of being a base-2
pseudoprime, and a randomly chosen 1024-bit number that is called prime has less
than  one  chance  in10
41
of  being  a  base-2pseudoprime.   So  if  you  are  merely
trying  to find a large  prime for  some application,  for  all  practical  purposes  you
almost never go wrong by choosing  large numbers at random  until one of them
causes  P
SEUDOPRIMEto returnPRIME.  But when the numbers being tested for
primality are not randomly chosen, we need a better approach for testing primality.

968Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
As we shall  see,  a little  more  cleverness,  and  some randomization,  will yield  a
primality-testing routine that works well on all inputs.
Unfortunately,  we cannot  entirely  eliminate  all the errors  by simply checking
equation (31.40) for a second base number, sayaD3, because there exist com-
posite integersn, known asCarmichael numbers, that satisfy equation (31.40) for
alla2Z

n
.  (We note that equation (31.40) does fail when gcd.a; n/ > 1—that
is, whena62Z

n
—but hoping to demonstrate thatnis composite by finding such
anacan be difficult ifnhas only large prime factors.)  The first three Carmichael
numbers are 561, 1105, and 1729.  Carmichael numbers are extremely rare; there
are, for example, only 255 of them less than 100,000,000.  Exercise 31.8-2 helps
explain why they are so rare.
We next show how to improve our primality test so that it won’t be fooled by
Carmichael numbers.
The Miller-Rabin randomized primality test
The Miller-Rabin primality test overcomes the problems of the simple test P
SEU-
DOPRIMEwith two modifications:

It tries several randomly chosen base valuesainstead of just one base value.

While computing each modular exponentiation, it looks for a nontrivial square
root of1, modulon, during the final set of squarings.  If it finds one, it stops
and returns
COMPOSITE.  Corollary 31.35 from Section 31.6 justifies detecting
composites in this manner.
The pseudocode for the Miller-Rabin primality test follows.  The inputn>2is
the odd number to be tested for primality, andsis the number of randomly cho-
sen base values fromZ
C
n
to be tried. The code uses the random-number generator
R
ANDOMdescribed on page 117:  RANDOM.1; n1/returns a randomly chosen
integerasatisfying1an1. The code uses an auxiliary procedure W
ITNESS
such that WITNESS.a; n/isTRUEif and only ifais a “witness” to the composite-
ness ofn—that is, if it is possible usingato prove (in a manner that we shall see)
thatnis composite. The test W
ITNESS.a; n/is an extension of, but more effective
than, the test
a
n1
61.modn/
that  formed  the  basis  (usingaD2)forP
SEUDOPRIME.   We  first  present  and
justify the construction of W
ITNESS, and then we shall show how we use it in the
Miller-Rabin  primality  test.   Letn1D2
t
uwheret1anduis odd;  i.e.,
the binary representation ofn1is the binary representation of the odd integeru
followed by exactlytzeros.  Therefore,a
n1
.a
u
/
2
t
.modn/, so that we can

31.8    Primality testing969
computea
n1
modnby first computinga
u
modnand then squaring the resultt
times successively.
W
ITNESS.a; n/
1lettandube such thatt1,uis odd, andn1D2
t
u
2x
0
DMODULAR-EXPONENTIATION.a;u;n/
3foriD1tot
4x
i
Dx
2
i1
modn
5ifx
i
==1andx
i1
¤1andx
i1
¤n1
6return
TRUE
7ifx
t
¤1
8return
TRUE
9returnFALSE
This  pseudocode  for  WITNESScomputesa
n1
modnby  first  computing  the
valuex
0
Da
u
modnin line 2 and then squaring the resultttimes in a row in the
forloop of lines 3–6.  By induction  oni, the sequencex
0
,x
1
, ...,x
t
of values
computed satisfies the equationx
i
a
2
i
u
.modn/foriD0; 1; : : : ; t,sothatin
particularx
t
a
n1
.modn/.  After line 4 performs a squaring step, however,
the loop may terminate early if lines 5–6 detect that a nontrivial square root of1
has just been discovered.  (We shall explain these tests shortly.)   If so,  the algo-
rithm stops and returns
TRUE.  Lines 7–8 returnTRUEif the value computed for
x
t
a
n1
.modn/is not equal to 1, just as the PSEUDOPRIMEprocedure returns
COMPOSITEin this case.   Line 9 returnsFALSEif we haven’t  returnedTRUEin
lines 6 or 8.
We now  argue  that  if  W
ITNESS.a; n/returnsTRUE,  then  we  can  construct  a
proof thatnis composite usingaas a witness.
If  W
ITNESSreturnsTRUEfrom  line  8,  then  it  has  discovered  thatx
t
D
a
n1
modn¤1.Ifnis prime,  however,  we have by Fermat’s theorem (Theo-
rem 31.31) thata
n1
1.modn/for alla2Z
C
n
. Therefore,ncannot be prime,
and the equationa
n1
modn¤1proves this fact.
If W
ITNESSreturnsTRUEfrom line 6, then it has discovered thatx
i1
is a non-
trivial square root of1,  modulon,  since we have thatx
i1
6 ̇1.modn/yet
x
i
x
2
i1
1.modn/.  Corollary 31.35 states that only ifnis composite can
there exist a nontrivial square root of1modulon, so that demonstrating thatx
i1
is a nontrivial square root of1modulonproves thatnis composite.
This completes our proof of the correctness of W
ITNESS. If we find that the call
W
ITNESS.a; n/returnsTRUE,thennis surely composite, and the witnessa, along
with the reason that the procedure returns
TRUE(did it return from line 6 or from
line 8?), provides a proof thatnis composite.

970Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
At  this  point,  we briefly  present  an  alternative  description  of  the  behavior  of
W
ITNESSas a function of the sequenceXDhx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
t
i, which we shall find
useful later on, when we analyze the efficiency of the Miller-Rabin primality test.
Note that ifx
i
D1for some0i<t,WITNESSmight not compute the rest
of the sequence.  If it were to do so, however, each valuex
iC1
;x
iC2
;:::;x
t
would
be1, and we consider these positions in the sequenceXas being all1s.  We have
four cases:
1.XDh:::;di,whered¤1:  the sequenceXdoes not end in1.Return
TRUE
in line 8;ais a witness to the compositeness ofn(by Fermat’s Theorem).
2.XDh1; 1; : : : ; 1i: the sequenceXis all1s.  Return
FALSE;ais not a witness
to the compositeness ofn.
3.XDh:::;1; 1; : : : ; 1i: the sequenceXends in1, and the last non-1is equal
to1.Return
FALSE;ais not a witness to the compositeness ofn.
4.XDh:::;d;1;:::;1i,whered¤ ̇1: the sequenceXends in1, but the last
non-1is not1.Return
TRUEin line 6;ais a witness to the compositeness
ofn,sincedis a nontrivial square root of1.
We now examine the Miller-Rabin primality test based on the use of W
ITNESS.
Again, we assume thatnis an odd integer greater than2.
M
ILLER-RABIN.n; s/
1forjD1tos
2aDR
ANDOM.1; n1/
3ifW
ITNESS.a; n/
4return
COMPOSITE//definitely
5return
PRIME//almost surely
The procedure  M
ILLER-RABINis a probabilistic  search  for  a proof  thatnis
composite.  The main loop (beginning on line 1) picks up tosrandom values ofa
fromZ
C
n
(line 2).  If one of thea’s picked is a witness to the compositeness ofn,
then M
ILLER-RABINreturnsCOMPOSITEon line 4.  Such a result is always cor-
rect,  by the  correctness  of  W
ITNESS.IfMILLER-RABINfinds  no witness  ins
trials, then the procedure assumes that this is because no witnesses exist, and there-
fore it assumes thatnis prime.  We shall see that this result is likely to be correct
ifsis large enough, but that there is still a tiny chance that the procedure may be
unlucky in its choice ofa’s and that witnesses do exist even though none has been
found.
To illustrate  the operation  of  M
ILLER-RABIN,letnbe  the Carmichael  num-
ber561,sothatn1D560D2
4
35,tD4,anduD35.   If  the  pro-
cedure  choosesaD7as a base,  Figure  31.4  in Section  31.6  shows  that  W
IT-
NESScomputesx
0
a
35
241  .mod561/and  thus  computes  the  sequence

31.8    Primality testing971
XDh241; 298; 166; 67; 1i.  Thus,  WITNESSdiscovers a nontrivial  square root
of1in the last squaring step, sincea
280
67  .modn/anda
560
1.modn/.
Therefore,aD7is a witness to the compositeness ofn,W
ITNESS.7; n/returns
TRUE,andMILLER-RABINreturnsCOMPOSITE.
Ifnis aˇ-bit number,  M
ILLER-RABINrequiresO.sˇ/arithmetic operations
andO.sˇ
3
/bit operations,  since it requires asymptotically no more work thans
modular exponentiations.
Error rate of the Miller-Rabin primality test
If M
ILLER-RABINreturnsPRIME, then there is a very slim chance that it has made
an error.   Unlike  P
SEUDOPRIME,  however,  the chance  of error  does not  depend
onn; there are no bad inputs for this procedure. Rather, it depends on the size ofs
and the “luck of the draw” in choosing base valuesa. Moreover, since each test is
more stringent than a simple check of equation (31.40), we can expect on general
principles that the error rate should be small for randomly chosen integersn.The
following theorem presents a more precise argument.
Theorem 31.38
Ifnis an odd composite number, then the number of witnesses to the composite-
ness ofnis at least.n1/=2.
ProofThe proof shows that the number of nonwitnesses  is at most.n1/=2,
which implies the theorem.
We  start  by  claiming  that  any  nonwitness  must  be  a  member  ofZ

n
.   Why?
Consider any nonwitnessa.  It must satisfya
n1
1.modn/or, equivalently,
aa
n2
1.modn/.   Thus,  the  equationax1.modn/has  a  solution,
namelya
n2
.    By  Corollary  31.21,  gcd.a; n/j1,  which  in  turn  implies  that
gcd.a; n/D1. Therefore,aisamemberofZ

n
; all nonwitnesses belong toZ

n
.
To complete the proof,  we show that  not only are all nonwitnesses  contained
inZ

n
, they are all contained in a proper subgroupBofZ

n
(recall that we sayB
is apropersubgroup ofZ

n
whenBis subgroup ofZ

n
butBis not equal toZ

n
).
By Corollary 31.16, we then have
j
B
j

j
Z

n
j
=2.Since
j
Z

n
j
n1, we obtain
j
B
j
.n1/=2. Therefore, the number of nonwitnesses is at most.n1/=2,so
that the number of witnesses must be at least.n1/=2.
We  now  show  how  to  find  a  proper  subgroupBofZ

n
containing  all  of  the
nonwitnesses. We break the proof into two cases.
Case 1:There exists anx2Z

n
such that
x
n1
61.modn/ :

972Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
In  other  words,nis  not  a  Carmichael  number.   Because,  as  we  noted  earlier,
Carmichael  numbers  are  extremely  rare,  case  1  is  the  main  case  that  arises  “in
practice” (e.g., whennhas been chosen randomly and is being tested for primal-
ity).
LetBD
f
b2Z

n
Wb
n1
1.modn/
g
.  Clearly,Bis nonempty, since12B.
SinceBis closed under multiplication  modulon,wehavethatBis a subgroup
ofZ

n
by Theorem 31.14.  Note that every nonwitness belongs toB, since a non-
witnessasatisfiesa
n1
1.modn/.Sincex2Z

n
B,wehavethatBis a
proper subgroup ofZ

n
.
Case 2:For allx2Z

n
,
x
n1
1.modn/ :(31.41)
In other  words,nis a Carmichael number.   This case is extremely rare in prac-
tice. However, the Miller-Rabin test (unlike a pseudo-primality test) can efficiently
determine that Carmichael numbers are composite, as we now show.
In  this  case,ncannot  be  a  prime  power.   To  see  why,  let  us  suppose  to  the
contrary thatnDp
e
,wherepis a prime ande>1.  We derive a contradiction
as follows.  Since we assume thatnis odd,pmust also be odd.  Theorem 31.32
implies thatZ

n
is a cyclic group:  it contains a generatorgsuch that ord
n
.g/D
j
Z

n
j
D.n/Dp
e
.11=p/D.p1/p
e1
. (The formula for.n/comes from
equation (31.20).)  By equation (31.41),  we haveg
n1
1.modn/.  Then the
discrete logarithm theorem (Theorem 31.33, takingyD0) implies thatn10
.mod.n//,or
.p1/p
e1
jp
e
1:
This is a contradiction fore>1,since.p1/p
e1
is divisible by the primep
butp
e
1is not. Thus,nis not a prime power.
Since the odd composite numbernis not a prime power, we decompose it into
a productn
1
n
2
,wheren
1
andn
2
are odd numbers greater than 1 that are relatively
prime to each other.  (There may be several ways to decomposen, and it does not
matter which one we choose.   For example,  ifnDp
e
1
1
p
e
2
2
p
e
r
r
,  then we can
choosen
1
Dp
e
1
1
andn
2
Dp
e
2
2
p
e
3
3
p
e
r
r
.)
Recall that we definetanduso thatn1D2
t
u,wheret1anduis odd, and
that for an inputa, the procedure W
ITNESScomputes the sequence
XDha
u
;a
2u
;a
2
2
u
;:::;a
2
t
u
i
(all computations are performed modulon).
Let us call a pair.; j /of integersacceptableif2Z

n
,j2
f
0; 1; : : : ; t
g
,and

2
j
u
1.modn/ :

31.8    Primality testing973
Acceptable  pairs  certainly  exist  sinceuis odd;  we can chooseDn1and
jD0,sothat.n1; 0/is an acceptable pair. Now pick the largest possiblejsuch
that there exists an acceptable pair.; j /,andfixso that.; j /is an acceptable
pair. Let
BDfx2Z

n
Wx
2
j
u
 ̇1.modn/g:
SinceBis closed under multiplication modulon, it is a subgroup ofZ

n
. By Theo-
rem 31.15, therefore,
j
B
j
divides
j
Z

n
j
. Every nonwitness must be a member ofB,
since the sequenceXproduced by a nonwitness must either be all1s or else contain
a1no later than thejth position, by the maximality ofj. (If.a; j
0
/is acceptable,
whereais a nonwitness, we must havej
0
jby how we chosej.)
We now use the existence ofto demonstrate that there exists aw2Z

n
B,
and hence thatBis a proper subgroup ofZ

n
.Since
2
j
u
1.modn/,wehave

2
j
u
1.modn
1
/by Corollary 31.29 to the Chinese remainder theorem.  By
Corollary 31.28, there exists awsimultaneously satisfying the equations
w.modn
1
/;
w1.modn
2
/:
Therefore,
w
2
j
u
1.modn
1
/;
w
2
j
u
1.modn
2
/:
By  Corollary  31.29,w
2
j
u
61.modn
1
/impliesw
2
j
u
61.modn/,and
w
2
j
u
61.modn
2
/impliesw
2
j
u
61.modn/.  Hence, we conclude that
w
2
j
u
6 ̇1.modn/,andsow62B.
It remains to show thatw2Z

n
, which we do by first working separately mod-
ulon
1
and modulon
2
.  Working modulon
1
, we observe that since2Z

n
,we
have that gcd.; n/D1, and so also gcd.; n
1
/D1;ifdoes not have any com-
mon divisors withn, then it certainly does not have any common divisors withn
1
.
Sincew.modn
1
/,  we see that gcd.w; n
1
/D1.   Working modulon
2
,we
observe thatw1.modn
2
/implies gcd.w; n
2
/D1. To combine these results,
we use Theorem 31.6, which implies that gcd.w; n
1
n
2
/Dgcd.w; n/D1.Thatis,
w2Z

n
.
Thereforew2Z

n
B, and we finish case 2 with the conclusion thatBis a
proper subgroup ofZ

n
.
In either case, we see that the number of witnesses to the compositeness ofnis
at least.n1/=2.
Theorem 31.39
For any odd integern>2and positive integers, the probability  that  M
ILLER-
R
ABIN.n; s/errs is at most2
s
.

974Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
ProofUsing Theorem 31.38, we see that ifnis composite, then each execution of
theforloop of lines 1–4 has a probability of at least1=2of discovering a witnessx
to the compositeness ofn.M
ILLER-RABINmakes an error only if it is so unlucky
as to miss discovering a witness to the compositeness ofnon each of thesiterations
of the main loop. The probability of such a sequence of misses is at most2
s
.
Ifnis prime, MILLER-RABINalways reports PRIME,andifnis composite, the
chance that M
ILLER-RABINreports PRIMEis at most2
s
.
When applying M
ILLER-RABINto a large randomly chosen integern,however,
we need to consider as well the prior probability thatnis prime, in order to cor-
rectly interpret  M
ILLER-RABIN’s  result.  Suppose that we fix a bit lengthˇand
choose at random an integernof lengthˇbits to be tested for primality.  LetA
denote the event thatnis prime.  By the prime number theorem (Theorem 31.37),
the probability thatnis prime is approximately
Pr
f
A
g
1=lnn
1:443=ˇ :
Now letBdenote the event that  M
ILLER-RABINreturns  PRIME.Wehavethat
Pr
 ̊
BjA


D0(or equivalently, that Pr
f
BjA
g
D1)andPr
 ̊
BjA


2
s
(or
equivalently, that Pr
 ̊
BjA


>12
s
).
But  what  is  Pr
f
AjB
g
,  the  probability  thatnis  prime,  given  that  M
ILLER-
R
ABINhas  returned  PRIME?   By  the  alternate  form  of  Bayes’s  theorem  (equa-
tion (C.18)) we have
Pr
f
AjB
g
D
Pr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
Pr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
CPr
 ̊
A


Pr
 ̊
BjA



1
1C2
s
.lnn1/
:
This probability does not exceed1=2untilsexceeds lg.lnn1/.  Intuitively, that
many initial trials are needed just for the confidence derived from failing to find a
witness to the compositeness ofnto overcome the prior bias in favor ofnbeing
composite. For a number withˇD1024bits, this initial testing requires about
lg.lnn1/lg.ˇ=1:443/
9
trials.   In  any  case,  choosingsD50should  suffice  for  almost  any  imaginable
application.
In fact,  the situation  is much better.   If we are trying  to find large  primes by
applying  M
ILLER-RABINto large randomly chosen odd integers,  then choosing
a  small  value  ofs(say3)  is  very  unlikely  to  lead  to  erroneous  results,  though

31.9Integer factorization975
we won’t prove it here.  The reason is that for a randomly chosen odd composite
integern, the expected number of nonwitnesses to the compositeness ofnis likely
to be very much smaller than.n1/=2.
If the integernis not chosen randomly, however, the best that can be proven is
that the number of nonwitnesses is at most.n1/=4, using an improved version
of Theorem 31.38. Furthermore, there do exist integersnfor which the number of
nonwitnesses is.n1/=4.
Exercises
31.8-1
Prove that if an odd integern>1is not a prime or a prime power, then there exists
a nontrivial square root of1modulon.
31.8-2?
It is possible to strengthen Euler’s theorem slightly to the form
a
	.n/
1.modn/for alla2Z

n
;
wherenDp
e
1
1
p
e
r
r
and.n/is defined by
.n/Dlcm..p
e
1
1
/;:::;.p
e
r
r
// :(31.42)
Prove  that.n/j.n/.    A  composite  numbernis  a  Carmichael  number  if
.n/jn1.    The  smallest  Carmichael  number  is561D31117;  here,
.n/Dlcm.2; 10; 16/D80,  which  divides560.   Prove that  Carmichael  num-
bers must be both “square-free” (not divisible by the square of any prime) and the
product of at least three primes. (For this reason, they are not very common.)
31.8-3
Prove that ifxis a nontrivial square root of1, modulon,thengcd.x1; n/and
gcd.xC1; n/are both nontrivial divisors ofn.
?31.9  Integer factorization
Suppose we have an integernthat we wish tofactor, that is, to decompose into a
product of primes. The primality test of the preceding section may tell us thatnis
composite, but it does not tell us the prime factors ofn. Factoring a large integern
seems to be much more difficult than simply determining whethernis prime or
composite.  Even with today’s supercomputers and the best algorithms to date, we
cannot feasibly factor an arbitrary1024-bit number.

976Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Pollard’s rho heuristic
Trial division by all integers up toRis guaranteed to factor completely any number
up toR
2
. For the same amount of work, the following procedure, POLLARD-RHO,
factors any number up toR
4
(unless we are unlucky).  Since the procedure is only
a  heuristic,  neither  its  running  time  nor  its  success  is  guaranteed,  although  the
procedure  is  highly  effective  in  practice.   Another  advantage  of  the  P
OLLARD-
R
HOprocedure is that it uses only a constant number of memory locations. (If you
wanted to, you could easily implement P
OLLARD-RHOon a programmable pocket
calculator to find factors of small numbers.)
P
OLLARD-RHO.n/
1iD1
2x
1
DRANDOM.0; n1/
3yDx
1
4kD2
5while
TRUE
6iDiC1
7x
i
D.x
2
i1
1/modn
8dDgcd.yx
i
;n/
9ifd¤1andd¤n
10printd
11ifi
==k
12yDx
i
13kD2k
The procedure works as follows. Lines 1–2 initializeito1andx
1
to a randomly
chosen value inZ
n
.Thewhileloop beginning on line 5 iterates forever, searching
for factors ofn. During each iteration of thewhileloop, line 7 uses the recurrence
x
i
D.x
2
i1
1/modn(31.43)
to produce the next value ofx
i
in the infinite sequence
x
1
;x
2
;x
3
;x
4
;::: ;(31.44)
with line 6 correspondingly incrementingi. The pseudocode is written using sub-
scripted variablesx
i
for clarity, but the program works the same if all of the sub-
scripts are dropped, since only the most recent value ofx
i
needs to be maintained.
With this modification, the procedure uses only a constant number of memory lo-
cations.
Every so often, the program saves the most recently generatedx
i
value in the
variabley. Specifically, the values that are saved are the ones whose subscripts are
powers of2:

31.9Integer factorization977
x
1
;x
2
;x
4
;x
8
;x
16
;::: :
Line 3 saves  the valuex
1
,  and line 12 savesx
k
wheneveriis equal  tok.The
variablekis  initialized  to  2  in  line  4,  and  line  13  doubles  it  whenever  line  12
updatesy.  Therefore,kfollows the sequence1; 2; 4; 8; : : :and always gives the
subscript of the next valuex
k
to be saved iny.
Lines 8–10  try to  find a factor  ofn,  using  the saved  value  ofyand  the  cur-
rent  value  ofx
i
.Specifically,  line  8  computes  the  greatest  common  divisor
dDgcd.yx
i
;n/.  If line 9 findsdto be a nontrivial divisor ofn, then line 10
printsd.
This  procedure  for  finding  a  factor  may  seem  somewhat  mysterious  at  first.
Note, however, that P
OLLARD-RHOnever prints an incorrect  answer;  any num-
ber it prints is a nontrivial divisor ofn.P
OLLARD-RHOmight not print anything
at all, though; it comes with no guarantee that it will print any divisors.  We shall
see, however, that we have good reason to expect P
OLLARD-RHOto print a fac-
torpofnafter‚.
p
p/iterations of thewhileloop.  Thus, ifnis composite, we
can expect this procedure to discover enough divisors to factorncompletely after
approximatelyn
1=4
updates,  since every prime factorpofnexcept possibly the
largest one is less than
p
n.
We  begin  our  analysis  of  how  this  procedure  behaves  by  studying  how  long
it takes a random  sequence  modulonto repeat a value.   SinceZ
n
is finite,  and
since each value in the sequence (31.44) depends only on the previous value, the
sequence (31.44) eventually repeats itself.  Once we reach anx
i
such thatx
i
Dx
j
for somej<i, we are in a cycle, sincex
iC1
Dx
jC1
,x
iC2
Dx
jC2
, and so on.
The reason for the name “rho heuristic” is that, as Figure 31.7 shows, we can draw
the sequencex
1
;x
2
;:::;x
j1
as the “tail” of the rho and the cyclex
j
;x
jC1
;:::;x
i
as the “body” of the rho.
Let us consider the question of how long it takes for the sequence ofx
i
to repeat.
This information is not exactly what we need, but we shall see later how to modify
the argument. For the purpose of this estimation, let us assume that the function
f
n
.x/D.x
2
1/modn
behaves like a “random” function.  Of course, it is not really random, but this as-
sumption yields results consistent with the observed behavior of P
OLLARD-RHO.
We can then consider eachx
i
to have been independently drawn fromZ
n
according
to a uniform distribution onZ
n
. By the birthday-paradox analysis of Section 5.4.1,
we expect‚.
p
n/steps to be taken before the sequence cycles.
Now for the required modification.  Letpbe a nontrivial factor ofnsuch that
gcd.p; n=p/D1. For example, ifnhas the factorizationnDp
e
1
1
p
e
2
2
p
e
r
r
,then
we may takepto bep
e
1
1
. (Ife
1
D1,thenpis just the smallest prime factor ofn,
a good example to keep in mind.)

978Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
996310
396
84
120
529
1053595
339
814
1194
63
8
3
2
(b)(c)(a)
3
2
18
26
8
31
11
47
177
1186
mod 1387mod 19mod 73
8
6
16
63
3
2
x
1
x
2
x
3
x
4
x
5
x
6
x
7
x
0
1
x
0
2
x
0
3
x
0
4
x
0
5
x
0
6
x
0
7
x
00
1
x
00
2
x
00
3
x
00
4
x
00
5
x
00
6
x
00
7
Figure 31.7Pollard’s  rho  heuristic.(a)The  values  produced  by  the  recurrencex
iC1
D
.x
2
i
1/mod1387, starting withx
1
D2.  The prime factorization of1387is1973.  The heavy
arrows indicate  the iteration steps  that are executed before  the factor 19 is discovered.   The light
arrows point to unreached values in the iteration, to illustrate the “rho” shape. The shaded values are
theyvalues stored by P
OLLARD-RHO. The factor 19 is discovered upon reachingx
7
D177,when
gcd.63177; 1387/D19is computed.  The firstxvalue that would be repeated is 1186, but the
factor 19 is discovered before this value is repeated.(b)The values produced by the same recurrence,
modulo 19.  Every valuex
i
given in part (a) is equivalent, modulo 19, to the valuex
0
i
shown here.
For example, bothx
4
D63andx
7
D177are equivalent to 6, modulo 19.(c)The values produced
by the same recurrence, modulo 73. Every valuex
i
given in part (a) is equivalent, modulo 73, to the
valuex
00
i
shown here. By the Chinese remainder theorem, each node in part (a) corresponds to a pair
of nodes, one from part (b) and one from part (c).
The sequencehx
i
iinduces a corresponding sequencehx
0
i
imodulop,where
x
0
i
Dx
i
modp
for alli.
Furthermore, becausef
n
is defined using only arithmetic operations (squaring
and subtraction) modulon, we can computex
0
iC1
fromx
0
i
; the “modulop”viewof

31.9Integer factorization979
the sequence is a smaller version of what is happening modulon:
x
0
iC1
Dx
iC1
modp
Df
n
.x
i
/modp
D..x
2
i
1/modn/modp
D.x
2
i
1/modp(by Exercise 31.1-7)
D..x
i
modp/
2
1/modp
D..x
0
i
/
2
1/modp
Df
p
.x
0
i
/:
Thus, although we are not explicitly computing the sequencehx
0
i
i, this sequence is
well defined and obeys the same recurrence as the sequencehx
i
i.
Reasoning as before, we find that the expected number of steps before the se-
quencehx
0
i
irepeats is‚.
p
p/.Ifpis small compared ton, the sequencehx
0
i
imight
repeat much more quickly than the sequencehx
i
i.  Indeed, as parts (b) and (c) of
Figure 31.7 show,  thehx
0
i
isequence  repeats  as soon  as two elements  of  the se-
quencehx
i
iare merely equivalent modulop, rather than equivalent modulon.
Lettdenote the index of the first repeated value in thehx
0
i
isequence,  and let
u>0denote the length of the cycle that has been thereby produced.  That is,t
andu>0are the smallest values such thatx
0
tCi
Dx
0
tCuCi
for alli0.Bythe
above arguments,  the expected  values oftanduare both‚.
p
p/.  Note that if
x
0
tCi
Dx
0
tCuCi
,thenpj.x
tCuCi
x
tCi
/. Thus, gcd.x
tCuCi
x
tCi
;n/ > 1.
Therefore, once P
OLLARD-RHOhas saved asyany valuex
k
such thatkt,
thenymodpis always on the cycle modulop.   (If a new value is saved asy,
that  value  is  also  on  the  cycle  modulop.)   Eventually,kis  set  to  a  value  that
is greater thanu,  and the procedure  then makes an entire loop around the cycle
modulopwithout changing the value ofy. The procedure then discovers a factor
ofnwhenx
i
“runs into” the previously stored value ofy, modulop, that is, when
x
i
y.modp/.
Presumably, the factor found is the factorp, although it may occasionally hap-
pen that a multiple ofpis discovered. Since the expected values of bothtanduare
‚.
p
p/, the expected number of steps required to produce the factorpis‚.
p
p/.
This algorithm might not perform quite as expected, for two reasons.  First, the
heuristic analysis of the running time is not rigorous, and it is possible that the cycle
of values, modulop, could be much larger than
p
p.  In this case, the algorithm
performs correctly but much more slowly than desired. In practice, this issue seems
to be moot. Second, the divisors ofnproduced by this algorithm might always be
one of  the  trivial  factors1orn.   For example,  suppose  thatnDpq,wherep
andqare prime.  It can happen that the values oftanduforpare identical with
the values oftanduforq, and thus the factorpis always revealed in the same
gcd operation that reveals the factorq. Since both factors are revealed at the same

980Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
time, the trivial factorpqDnis revealed, which is useless.  Again, this problem
seems to be insignificant in practice. If necessary, we can restart the heuristic with
a different recurrence of the formx
iC1
D.x
2
i
c/modn.  (We should avoid the
valuescD0andcD2for reasons we will not go into here, but other values are
fine.)
Of  course,  this  analysis  is  heuristic  and  not  rigorous,  since  the  recurrence  is
not  really “random.”   Nonetheless,  the procedure  performs  well in practice,  and
it seems to be as efficient as this heuristic analysis indicates.  It is the method of
choice for finding small prime factors of a large number. To factor aˇ-bit compos-
ite numberncompletely, we only need to find all prime factors less thanbn
1=2
c,
and so we expect P
OLLARD-RHOto require at mostn
1=4
D2
ˇ=4
arithmetic opera-
tions and at mostn
1=4
ˇ
2
D2
ˇ=4
ˇ
2
bit operations. POLLARD-RHO’s ability to find
a small factorpofnwith an expected number‚.
p
p/of arithmetic operations is
often its most appealing feature.
Exercises
31.9-1
Referring to the execution history shown in Figure 31.7(a), when does P
OLLARD-
R
HOprint the factor 73 of 1387?
31.9-2
Suppose that we are given a functionfWZ
n
!Z
n
and an initial valuex
0
2Z
n
.
Definex
i
Df.x
i1
/foriD1;2;:::.Lettandu>0be the smallest values such
thatx
tCi
Dx
tCuCi
foriD0; 1; : : :. In the terminology of Pollard’s rho algorithm,
tis the length of the tail anduis the length of the cycle of the rho. Give an efficient
algorithm to determinetanduexactly, and analyze its running time.
31.9-3
How many steps would you expect P
OLLARD-RHOto require to discover a factor
of the formp
e
,wherepis prime ande>1?
31.9-4?
One disadvantage of P
OLLARD-RHOas written is that it requires one gcd compu-
tation for each step of the recurrence.  Instead, we could batch the gcd computa-
tions by accumulating the product of severalx
i
values in a row and then using this
product instead ofx
i
in the gcd computation.  Describe carefully how you would
implement this idea, why it works, and what batch size you would pick as the most
effective when working on aˇ-bit numbern.

Problems for Chapter 31981
Problems
31-1  Binary gcd algorithm
Most computers can perform the operations of subtraction, testing the parity (odd
or even) of a binary integer, and halving more quickly than computing remainders.
This problem investigates thebinary gcd algorithm, which avoids the remainder
computations used in Euclid’s algorithm.
a.Prove that ifaandbare both even, then gcd.a; b/D2gcd.a=2; b=2/.
b.Prove that ifais odd andbis even, then gcd.a; b/Dgcd.a; b=2/.
c.Prove that ifaandbare both odd, then gcd.a; b/Dgcd..ab/=2; b/.
d.Design  an  efficient  binary  gcd  algorithm  for  input  integersaandb,where
ab,  that  runs  inO.lga/time.   Assume  that  each  subtraction,  parity  test,
and halving takes unit time.
31-2  Analysis of bit operations in Euclid’s algorithm
a.Consider the ordinary “paper and pencil” algorithm for long division: dividing
abyb,  which  yields  a  quotientqand  remainderr.   Show  that  this  method
requiresO..1Clgq/lgb/bit operations.
b.Define.a; b/D.1Clga/.1Clgb/. Show that the number of bit operations
performed by E
UCLIDin reducing the problem of computing gcd.a; b/to that
of computing gcd.b; amodb/is at mostc..a; b/.b; amodb//for some
sufficiently large constantc>0.
c.Show  that  E
UCLID.a; b/requiresO..a; b//bit  operations  in  general  and
O.ˇ
2
/bit operations when applied to twoˇ-bit inputs.
31-3  Three algorithms for Fibonacci numbers
This problem compares the efficiency of three methods for computing thenth Fi-
bonacci numberF
n
,givenn. Assume that the cost of adding, subtracting, or mul-
tiplying two numbers isO.1/, independent of the size of the numbers.
a.Show that the running time of the straightforward recursive method for com-
putingF
n
based on recurrence (3.22) is exponential inn. (See, for example, the
F
IBprocedure on page 775.)
b.Show how to computeF
n
inO.n/time using memoization.

982Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
c.Show how to computeF
n
inO.lgn/time using only integer addition and mul-
tiplication. (Hint:Consider the matrix

01
11

and its powers.)
d.Assume now that adding twoˇ-bit numbers takes‚.ˇ/time and that multi-
plying twoˇ-bit numbers takes‚.ˇ
2
/time. What is the running time of these
three methods under this more reasonable cost measure for the elementary arith-
metic operations?
31-4  Quadratic residues
Letpbe an odd prime.  A numbera2Z

p
is aquadratic residueif the equation
x
2
Da.modp/has a solution for the unknownx.
a.Show that there are exactly.p1/=2quadratic residues, modulop.
b.Ifpis prime, we define theLegendre symbol.
a
p
/,fora2Z

p
,tobe1ifais a
quadratic residue modulopand1otherwise. Prove that ifa2Z

p
,then

a
p

a
.p1/=2
.modp/ :
Give an efficient algorithm that determines whether a given numberais a qua-
dratic residue modulop. Analyze the efficiency of your algorithm.
c.Prove that ifpis a prime of the form4kC3andais a quadratic residue inZ

p
,
thena
kC1
modpis a square root ofa, modulop.  How much time is required
to find the square root of a quadratic residueamodulop?
d.Describe an efficient randomized algorithm for finding a nonquadratic residue,
modulo an arbitrary primep, that is, a member ofZ

p
that is not a quadratic
residue. How many arithmetic operations does your algorithm require on aver-
age?
Chapter notes
Niven and Zuckerman [265] provide an excellent introduction to elementary num-
ber theory.  Knuth [210] contains a good discussion of algorithms for finding the

Notes for Chapter 31983
greatest common divisor, as well as other basic number-theoretic algorithms. Bach
[30] and Riesel [295] provide more recent surveys of computational number the-
ory.   Dixon  [91]  gives  an  overview  of  factorization  and  primality  testing.   The
conference proceedings edited by Pomerance [280] contains several excellent sur-
vey articles.  More recently,  Bach and Shallit [31] have provided an exceptional
overview of the basics of computational number theory.
Knuth [210] discusses the origin of Euclid’s algorithm.  It appears in Book 7,
Propositions 1 and 2, of the Greek mathematician Euclid’sElements,whichwas
written around 300
B.C.  Euclid’s description may have been derived from an al-
gorithm due to Eudoxus around 375
B.C.  Euclid’s algorithm may hold the honor
of being the oldest nontrivial algorithm; it is rivaled only by an algorithm for mul-
tiplication known to the ancient Egyptians.  Shallit [312] chronicles the history of
the analysis of Euclid’s algorithm.
Knuth  attributes  a  special  case  of  the  Chinese  remainder  theorem  (Theo-
rem 31.27) to the Chinese mathematician Sun-Ts  ̆u, who lived sometime between
200
B.C.andA.D. 200—the date is quite uncertain.  The same special case was
given by the Greek mathematician Nichomachus around
A.D. 100.  It was gener-
alized by Chhin Chiu-Shao in 1247.  The Chinese remainder theorem was finally
stated and proved in its full generality by L. Euler in 1734.
The randomized primality-testing algorithm presented here is due to Miller [255]
and Rabin [289];  it is the fastest randomized primality-testing  algorithm known,
to within constant factors.  The proof of Theorem 31.39 is a slight adaptation of
one  suggested  by  Bach  [29].   A  proof  of  a  stronger  result  for  M
ILLER-RABIN
was given by Monier [258, 259]. For many years primality-testing was the classic
example  of  a  problem  where  randomization  appeared  to  be  necessary  to  obtain
an efficient (polynomial-time) algorithm.  In 2002, however, Agrawal, Kayal, and
Saxema [4] surprised everyone with their deterministic polynomial-time primality-
testing algorithm.  Until then, the fastest deterministic primality testing algorithm
known, due to Cohen and Lenstra [73], ran in time.lgn/
O.lg lg lgn/
on inputn,which
is just slightly superpolynomial.  Nonetheless,  for practical purposes randomized
primality-testing algorithms remain more efficient and are preferred.
The problem of finding large “random” primes is nicely discussed in an article
by Beauchemin, Brassard, Cr ́epeau, Goutier, and Pomerance [36].
The concept  of a public-key  cryptosystem  is due  to Diffie and Hellman [87].
The RSA cryptosystem  was proposed  in 1977  by Rivest,  Shamir,  and Adleman
[296].  Since then,  the field of cryptography  has blossomed.   Our understanding
of the RSA cryptosystem has deepened, and modern implementations use signif-
icant refinements of the basic techniques presented here.  In addition,  many new
techniques have been developed for proving cryptosystems to be secure.  For ex-
ample, Goldwasser and Micali [142] show that randomization can be an effective
tool in the design of secure public-key encryption schemes. For signature schemes,

984Chapter 31Number-Theoretic Algorithms
Goldwasser, Micali, and Rivest [143] present a digital-signature scheme for which
every conceivable type of forgery is provably as difficult as factoring.  Menezes,
van Oorschot, and Vanstone [254] provide an overview of applied cryptography.
The rho heuristic for integer factorization was invented by Pollard [277].  The
version presented here is a variant proposed by Brent [56].
The best algorithms for factoring large numbers have a running time that grows
roughly exponentially with the cube root of the length of the numbernto be fac-
tored.  The general number-field sieve factoring algorithm (as developed by Buh-
ler, Lenstra, and Pomerance [57] as an extension of the ideas in the number-field
sieve factoring algorithm by Pollard [278] and Lenstra et al. [232] and refined by
Coppersmith [77] and others) is perhaps the most efficient such algorithm in gen-
eral  for  large  inputs.   Although  it  is  difficult  to  give  a  rigorous  analysis  of  this
algorithm, under reasonable assumptions we can derive a running-time estimate of
L.1=3; n/
1:902Co.1/
,whereL. ̨; n/De
.lnn/
 ̨
.ln lnn/
1 ̨
.
The elliptic-curve method due to Lenstra [233] may be more effective for some
inputs than the number-field sieve method, since, like Pollard’s rho method, it can
find a small prime factorpquite quickly.  With this method, the time to findpis
estimated to beL.1=2; p/
p
2Co.1/
.

32String Matching
Text-editing programs frequently need to find all occurrences  of a pattern in the
text. Typically, the text is a document being edited, and the pattern searched for is a
particular word supplied by the user. Efficient algorithms for this problem—called
“string matching”—can greatly aid the responsiveness of the text-editing program.
Among their many other applications, string-matching algorithms search for par-
ticular patterns in DNA sequences.  Internet search engines also use them to find
Web pages relevant to queries.
We  formalize  the  string-matching  problem  as  follows.    We  assume  that  the
text  is  an  arrayTŒ1::nof  lengthnand  that  the  pattern  is  an  arrayPŒ1::m
of  lengthmn.   We  further  assume  that  the  elements  ofPandTare  char-
acters drawn from a finite alphabet†.  For example,  we may have†D
f
0,1
g
or†D
f
a;b;:::;z
g
.  The character arraysPandTare often calledstringsof
characters.
Referring to Figure 32.1,  we say that patternPoccurs with shiftsin textT
(or, equivalently, that patternPoccurs beginning at positionsC1in textT)if
0snmandTŒsC1::sCmDPŒ1::m(that is, ifTŒsCjDPŒj,for
1jm). IfPoccurs with shiftsinT, then we callsavalid shift; otherwise,
we callsaninvalid shift
.Thestring-matching problemis the problem of finding
all valid shifts with which a given patternPoccurs in a given textT.
abcabaabcabac
abaa
patternP
textT
s = 3
Figure 32.1An example of the string-matching problem, where we want to find all occurrences of
the patternPDabaain the textTDabcabaabcabac. The pattern occurs only once in the text,
at shiftsD3, which we call a valid shift. A vertical line connects each character of the pattern to its
matching character in the text, and all matched characters are shaded.

986Chapter 32String Matching
AlgorithmPreprocessing timeMatching time
Naive0O..nmC1/m/
Rabin-Karp‚.m/O..nmC1/m/
Finite automatonO.m
j
†
j
/‚.n/
Knuth-Morris-Pratt‚.m/‚.n/
Figure 32.2The string-matching algorithms in this chapter and their preprocessing and matching
times.
Except  for the naive brute-force  algorithm,  which we review in Section 32.1,
each string-matching algorithm in this chapter performs some preprocessing based
on the pattern and then finds all valid shifts; we call this latter phase “matching.”
Figure 32.2 shows the preprocessing and matching times for each of the algorithms
in this chapter.  The total running time of each algorithm is the sum of the prepro-
cessing and matching times.  Section 32.2 presents an interesting string-matching
algorithm,  due to Rabin and Karp.   Although the‚..nmC1/m/worst-case
running time of this algorithm is no better than that of the naive method, it works
much better on average and in practice.  It also generalizes nicely to other pattern-
matching problems.  Section 32.3 then describes a string-matching algorithm that
begins by constructing a finite automaton specifically designed to search for occur-
rences of the given patternPin a text. This algorithm takesO.m
j
†
j
/preprocess-
ing time, but only‚.n/matching time. Section 32.4 presents the similar, but much
cleverer, Knuth-Morris-Pratt (or KMP) algorithm; it has the same‚.n/matching
time, and it reduces the preprocessing time to only‚.m/.
Notation and terminology
We  denote  by†

(read  “sigma-star”)  the  set  of  all  finite-length  strings  formed
using  characters  from  the  alphabet†.   In  this  chapter,  we consider  only  finite-
length strings.  The zero-lengthempty string, denoted", also belongs to†

.The
length  of  a stringxis denoted
j
x
j
.Theconcatenationof  two stringsxandy,
denotedxy, has length
j
x
j
C
j
y
j
and consists of the characters fromxfollowed by
the characters fromy.
We say that a stringwis aprefixof a stringx, denotedwx,ifxDwyfor
some stringy2†

.  Note that ifwx,then
j
w
j

j
x
j
.  Similarly, we say that a
stringwis asuffixof a stringx, denotedwx,ifxDywfor somey2†

.As
with a prefix,wximplies
j
w
j

j
x
j
. For example, we haveababccaand
ccaabcca. The empty string"is both a suffix and a prefix of every string. For
any stringsxandyand any charactera,wehavexyif and only ifxaya.

Chapter 32String Matching987
x
z
x
y
y
(a)
x
z
x
y
y
(b)
x
z
x
y
y
(c)
Figure 32.3A graphical proof of Lemma 32.1. We suppose thatx ́andy ́. The three parts
of the figure illustrate the three cases of the lemma. Vertical lines connect matching regions (shown
shaded) of the strings.(a)If
j
x
j

j
y
j
,thenxy.(b)If
j
x
j

j
y
j
,thenyx.(c)If
j
x
j
D
j
y
j
,
thenxDy.
Also note thatandare transitive relations. The following lemma will be useful
later.
Lemma 32.1 (Overlapping-suffix lemma)
Suppose thatx,y,and ́are strings such thatx ́andy ́.If
j
x
j

j
y
j
,
thenxy.If
j
x
j

j
y
j
,thenyx.If
j
x
j
D
j
y
j
,thenxDy.
ProofSee Figure 32.3 for a graphical proof.
For brevity of notation, we denote thek-character prefixPŒ1::kof the pattern
PŒ1::mbyP
k
.  Thus,P
0
D"andP
m
DPDPŒ1::m.  Similarly, we denote
thek-character prefix of the textTbyT
k
.  Using this notation,  we can state the
string-matching problem as that of finding all shiftssin the range0snm
such thatPT
sCm
.
In our pseudocode, we allow two equal-length strings to be compared for equal-
ity as a primitive operation.  If the strings are compared from left to right and the
comparison stops when a mismatch is discovered, we assume that the time taken
by such a test is a linear function of the number of matching characters discovered.
To be precise, the test “x
==y” is assumed to take time‚.tC1/,wheretis the
length of the longest string ́such that ́xand ́y.  (We write‚.tC1/
rather than‚.t /to handle the case in whichtD0; the first characters compared
do not match, but it takes a positive amount of time to perform this comparison.)

988Chapter 32String Matching
32.1  The naive string-matching algorithm
The naive algorithm  finds all valid shifts using  a loop that  checks the condition
PŒ1::mDTŒsC1::sCmfor each of thenmC1possible values ofs.
N
AIVE-STRING-MAT C H E R.T; P /
1nDT:length
2mDP:length
3forsD0tonm
4ifPŒ1::m
==TŒsC1::sCm
5print “Pattern occurs with shift”s
Figure 32.4 portrays the naive string-matching procedure as sliding a “template”
containing  the pattern over the text,  noting for which shifts all of the characters
on the template equal  the corresponding  characters  in the text.   Theforloop of
lines  3–5  considers  each  possible  shift  explicitly.   The test  in  line  4 determines
whether the current shift is valid; this test implicitly loops to check corresponding
character positions until all positions match successfully or a mismatch is found.
Line 5 prints out each valid shifts.
Procedure N
AIVE-STRING-MAT C H E Rtakes timeO..nmC1/m/, and this
bound is tight in the worst case.  For example, consider the text stringa
n
(a string
ofna’s) and the patterna
m
. For each of thenmC1possible values of the shifts,
the implicit loop on line 4 to compare corresponding  characters must executem
times to validate the shift. The worst-case running time is thus‚..nmC1/m/,
which  is‚.n
2
/ifmD
b
n=2
c
.   Because  it  requires  no  preprocessing,  NAIVE-
S
TRING-MAT C H E R’s running time equals its matching time.
acaabc
aab
s = 0
(a)
acaabc
aab
s = 1
(b)
acaabc
aab
s = 2
(c)
acaabc
aab
s = 3
(d)
Figure 32.4The  operation  of  the  naive  string  matcher  for  the  patternPDaaband  the  text
TDacaabc. We can imagine the patternPas a template that we slide next to the text.(a)–(d)The
four successive alignments tried by the naive string matcher. In each part, vertical lines connect cor-
responding regions found to match (shown shaded), and a jagged line connects the first mismatched
character found, if any.  The algorithm finds one occurrence of the pattern, at shiftsD2,shownin
part (c).

32.1The naive string-matching algorithm989
As we shall see, NAIVE-STRING-MAT C H E Ris not an optimal procedure for this
problem. Indeed, in this chapter we shall see that the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
is much better in the worst case.  The naive string-matcher is inefficient because
it  entirely  ignores  information  gained  about  the  text  for  one  value  ofswhen  it
considers other values ofs. Such information can be quite valuable, however.  For
example, ifPDaaaband we find thatsD0is valid, then none of the shifts1,2,
or3are valid, sinceTŒ4Db. In the following sections, we examine several ways
to make effective use of this sort of information.
Exercises
32.1-1
Show the comparisons the naive string matcher makes for the patternPD0001
in the textTD000010001010001.
32.1-2
Suppose that all characters in the patternPare different.  Show how to accelerate
N
AIVE-STRING-MAT C H E Rto run in timeO.n/on ann-character textT.
32.1-3
Suppose that patternPand textTarerandomlychosen strings of lengthmandn,
respectively, from thed-ary alphabet†
d
D
f
0; 1; : : : ; d1
g
,whered2.Show
that theexpectednumber of character-to-character  comparisons made by the im-
plicit loop in line 4 of the naive algorithm is
.nmC1/
1d
m
1d
1
2.nmC1/
over all executions of this loop. (Assume that the naive algorithm stops comparing
characters for a given shift once it finds a mismatch or matches the entire pattern.)
Thus, for randomly chosen strings, the naive algorithm is quite efficient.
32.1-4
Suppose we allow the patternPto contain occurrences of agap character}that
can match anarbitrarystring of characters (even one of zero length). For example,
the patternab}ba}coccurs in the textcabccbacbacabas
cab
’
ab
cc
’
}
ba
’
ba
cba
“
}
c
’
c
ab
and as
cab
’
ab
ccbac
—
}
ba
’
ba
’
}
c
’
c
ab:

990Chapter 32String Matching
Note that the gap character may occur an arbitrary number of times in the pattern
but not at all in the text.  Give a polynomial-time algorithm to determine whether
such a patternPoccurs in a given textT, and analyze the running time of your
algorithm.
32.2  The Rabin-Karp algorithm
Rabin and Karp proposed a string-matching algorithm that performs well in prac-
tice  and  that  also  generalizes  to  other  algorithms  for  related  problems,  such  as
two-dimensional pattern matching.  The Rabin-Karp algorithm uses‚.m/prepro-
cessing time, and its worst-case running time is‚..nmC1/m/. Based on certain
assumptions, however, its average-case running time is better.
This algorithm makes use of elementary number-theoretic  notions such as the
equivalence of two numbers modulo a third number.  You might want to refer to
Section 31.1 for the relevant definitions.
For expository purposes, let us assume that†D
f
0;1;2;:::;9
g
, so that each
character is a decimal digit. (In the general case, we can assume that each charac-
ter is a digit in radix-dnotation, wheredD
j
†
j
.)  We can then view a string ofk
consecutive characters as representing a length-kdecimal number.  The character
string31415thus corresponds to the decimal number 31,415.  Because we inter-
pret the input characters as both graphical symbols and digits, we find it convenient
in this section to denote them as we would digits, in our standard text font.
Given a patternPŒ1::m,letpdenote its corresponding decimal value. In a sim-
ilar manner, given a textTŒ1::n,lett
s
denote the decimal value of the length-m
substringTŒsC1::sCm,forsD0; 1; : : : ; nm. Certainly,t
s
Dpif and only
ifTŒsC1::sCmDPŒ1::m; thus,sis a valid shift if and only ift
s
Dp.Ifwe
could computepin time‚.m/and all thet
s
values in a total of‚.nmC1/time,
1
then we could determine all valid shiftssin time‚.m/C‚.nmC1/D‚.n/
by comparingpwith each of thet
s
values. (For the moment, let’s not worry about
the possibility thatpand thet
s
values might be very large numbers.)
We can computepin time‚.m/using Horner’s rule (see Section 30.1):
pDPŒmC10 .P Œm1C10.P Œm2CC10.P Œ2C10P Œ1/// :
Similarly, we can computet
0
fromTŒ1::min time‚.m/.
1
We write‚.nmC1/instead of‚.nm/becausestakes onnmC1different values.  The
“C1” is significant in an asymptotic sense because whenmDn, computing the lonet
s
value takes
‚.1/time, not‚.0/time.

32.2The Rabin-Karp algorithm991
To compute the remaining valuest
1
;t
2
;:::;t
nm
in time‚.nm/, we observe
that we can computet
sC1
fromt
s
in constant time, since
t
sC1
D10.t
s
10
m1
TŒsC1/CTŒsCmC1 :(32.1)
Subtracting10
m1
TŒsC1removes the high-order digit fromt
s
, multiplying the
result by10shifts the number left by one digit position, and addingTŒsCmC1
brings in the appropriate low-order digit.  For example, ifmD5andt
s
D31415,
then we wish to remove the high-order digitTŒsC1D3andbringinthenew
low-order digit (suppose it isTŒsC5C1D2) to obtain
t
sC1
D10.31415100003/C2
D14152 :
If we precompute the constant10
m1
(which we can do in timeO.lgm/using the
techniques of Section 31.6, although for this application a straightforwardO.m/-
time method suffices), then each execution of equation (32.1) takes a constant num-
ber of arithmetic operations.  Thus, we can computepin time‚.m/, and we can
compute all oft
0
;t
1
;:::;t
nm
in time‚.nmC1/.  Therefore, we can find all
occurrences of the patternPŒ1::min the textTŒ1::nwith‚.m/preprocessing
time and‚.nmC1/matching time.
Until  now,  we  have  intentionally  overlooked  one  problem:pandt
s
may  be
too large to work with conveniently.  IfPcontainsmcharacters, then we cannot
reasonably  assume that each arithmetic  operation  onp(which ismdigits long)
takes “constant time.” Fortunately, we can solve this problem easily, as Figure 32.5
shows: computepand thet
s
values modulo a suitable modulusq. We can compute
pmoduloqin‚.m/time and all thet
s
values moduloqin‚.nmC1/time.
If we choose the modulusqas a prime such that10qjust fits within one computer
word, then we can perform all the necessary computations  with single-precision
arithmetic.   In general,  with ad-ary alphabet
f
0; 1; : : : ; d1
g
,  we chooseqso
thatdqfits within a computer word and adjust the recurrence equation (32.1) to
work moduloq,sothatitbecomes
t
sC1
D.d.t
s
TŒsC1h/CTŒsCmC1/modq;(32.2)
wherehd
m1
.modq/is the value of the digit “1” in the high-order position
of anm-digit text window.
The solution of working moduloqis not perfect,  however:t
s
p.modq/
does  not  imply  thatt
s
Dp.   On  the  other  hand,  ift
s
6p.modq/,thenwe
definitely  have  thatt
s
¤p,  so that  shiftsis invalid.   We can  thus  use the test
t
s
p.modq/as a fast heuristic test to rule out invalid shiftss.  Any shiftsfor
whicht
s
p.modq/must be tested further to see whethersis really valid or
we just have aspurious hit.  This additional  test explicitly  checks the condition

992Chapter 32String Matching
2359023141526739921
7
(a)
mod 13
2359023141526739921
7
(b)
mod 13
12345678910111213141516171819
893110185119117104
valid
match
spurious
hit
.........
314152
78
old
high-order
digit
new
low-order
digit
≡
(31415 – 3·10000)·10 + 2  (mod 13) 
old
high-order
digit
new
low-order
digitshift
≡
(7 – 3·3)·10 + 2  (mod 13) 
≡
8  (mod 13) 
(c)
14152
Figure 32.5The Rabin-Karp algorithm. Each character is a decimal digit, and we compute values
modulo13.(a)A text string.  A window of length 5 is shown shaded.  The numerical value of the
shaded number, computed modulo13, yields the value7.(b)The same text string with values com-
puted modulo13for each possible position of a length-5 window. Assuming the patternPD31415,
we look for windows whose value modulo13is7,since314157.mod13/. The algorithm finds
two such windows, shown shaded in the figure.  The first, beginning at text position7, is indeed an
occurrence of the pattern, while the second, beginning at text position13, is a spurious hit.(c)How
to compute the value for a window in constant time, given the value for the previous window.  The
first window has value 31415. Dropping the high-order digit3, shifting left (multiplying by10), and
then adding in the low-order digit2gives us the new value14152.  Because all computations are
performed modulo13, the value for the first window is7, and the value for the new window is8.

32.2The Rabin-Karp algorithm993
PŒ1::mDTŒsC1::sCm.Ifqis large enough, then we hope that spurious
hits occur infrequently enough that the cost of the extra checking is low.
The following procedure makes these ideas precise. The inputs to the procedure
are the textT, the patternP, the radixdto use (which is typically taken to be
j
†
j
),
and the primeqto use.
R
ABIN-KARP-MAT C H E R.T;P;d;q/
1nDT:length
2mDP:length
3hDd
m1
modq
4pD0
5t
0
D0
6foriD1tom//preprocessing
7pD.dpCPŒi/modq
8t
0
D.dt
0
CTŒi/modq
9forsD0tonm//matching
10ifp
==t
s
11ifPŒ1::m==TŒsC1::sCm
12print “Pattern occurs with shift”s
13ifs<nm
14t
sC1
D.d.t
s
TŒsC1h/CTŒsCmC1/modq
The procedure  R
ABIN-KARP-MAT C H E Rworks as follows.  All characters are
interpreted as radix-ddigits. The subscripts ontare provided only for clarity; the
program works correctly if all the subscripts are dropped. Line 3 initializeshto the
value of the high-order digit position of anm-digit window. Lines 4–8 computep
as the value ofPŒ1::mmodqandt
0
as the value ofTŒ1::mmodq.Thefor
loop of lines 9–14 iterates through all possible shiftss, maintaining the following
invariant:
Whenever line 10 is executed,t
s
DTŒsC1::sCmmodq.
IfpDt
s
in line 10 (a “hit”), then line 11 checks to see whetherPŒ1::mD
TŒsC1::sCmin order to rule out the possibility of a spurious hit. Line 12 prints
out any valid shifts that are found.  Ifs<nm(checked in line 13), then thefor
loop will execute at least one more time, and so line 14 first executes to ensure that
the loop invariant holds when we get back to line 10.  Line 14 computes the value
oft
sC1
modqfrom the value oft
s
modqin constant time using equation (32.2)
directly.
R
ABIN-KARP-MAT C H E Rtakes‚.m/preprocessing time, and its matching time
is‚..nmC1/m/in the worst case, since (like the naive string-matching algo-
rithm) the Rabin-Karp algorithm explicitly verifies every valid shift.  IfPDa
m

994Chapter 32String Matching
andTDa
n
, then verifying takes time‚..nmC1/m/, since each of thenmC1
possible shifts is valid.
In many applications,  we expect few valid shifts—perhaps some constantcof
them.  In such applications,  the expected matching time of the algorithm is only
O..nmC1/Ccm/DO.nCm/, plus the time required to process spurious
hits. We can base a heuristic analysis on the assumption that reducing values mod-
uloqacts like a random mapping from†

toZ
q
. (See the discussion on the use of
division for hashing in Section 11.3.1. It is difficult to formalize and prove such an
assumption, although one viable approach is to assume thatqis chosen randomly
from integers of the appropriate size. We shall not pursue this formalization here.)
We can then expect that the number of spurious hits isO.n=q/, since we can es-
timate the chance that an arbitraryt
s
will be equivalent  top, moduloq,as1=q.
Since there areO.n/positions at which the test of line 10 fails and we spendO.m/
time for each hit, the expected matching time taken by the Rabin-Karp algorithm
is
O.n/CO.m.Cn=q// ;
whereis the number of valid shifts.  This running time isO.n/ifDO.1/and
we chooseqm.  That is, if the expected number of valid shifts is small (O.1/)
and  we choose  the primeqto be larger  than  the  length  of  the  pattern,  then  we
can expect the Rabin-Karp procedure to use onlyO.nCm/matching time. Since
mn, this expected matching time isO.n/.
Exercises
32.2-1
Working moduloqD11, how many spurious hits does the Rabin-Karp matcher en-
counter in the textTD3141592653589793when looking for the patternPD26?
32.2-2
How would you extend the Rabin-Karp method to the problem of searching a text
string for an occurrence of any one of a given set ofkpatterns? Start by assuming
that allkpatterns have the same length. Then generalize your solution to allow the
patterns to have different lengths.
32.2-3
Show how to extend the Rabin-Karp method to handle the problem of looking for
agivenm	mpattern in ann	narray of characters. (The pattern may be shifted
vertically and horizontally, but it may not be rotated.)

32.3String matching with finite automata995
32.2-4
Alice has a copy of a longn-bit fileADha
n1
;a
n2
;:::;a
0
i, and Bob similarly
has ann-bit fileBDhb
n1
;b
n2
;:::;b
0
i.  Alice and Bob wish to know if their
files are identical.  To avoid transmitting all ofAorB, they use the following fast
probabilistic check.  Together, they select a primeq > 1000nand randomly select
an integerxfrom
f
0; 1; : : : ; q1
g
. Then, Alice evaluates
A.x/D
 
n1
X
iD0
a
i
x
i
!
modq
and  Bob  similarly  evaluatesB.x/.   Prove  that  ifA¤B,  there  is  at  most  one
chance in1000thatA.x/DB.x/, whereas if the two files are the same,A.x/is
necessarily the same asB.x/.(Hint:See Exercise 31.4-4.)
32.3  String matching with finite automata
Many string-matching algorithms build a finite automaton—a simple machine for
processing information—that scans the text stringTfor all occurrences of the pat-
ternP.  This section presents  a method for building  such an automaton.   These
string-matching automata are very efficient:  they examine each text characterex-
actly once, taking constant time per text character. The matching time used—after
preprocessing the pattern to build the automaton—is therefore‚.n/.  The time to
build the automaton, however, can be large if†is large.  Section 32.4 describes a
clever way around this problem.
We begin this section with the definition of a finite automaton. We then examine
a special  string-matching  automaton and show how to use it to find occurrences
of a pattern in a text.  Finally, we shall show how to construct the string-matching
automaton for a given input pattern.
Finite automata
Afinite automatonM,  illustrated  in  Figure  32.6,  is  a  5-tuple.Q; q
0
;A;†;ı/,
where

Qis a finite set ofstates,

q
0
2Qis thestart state,

AQis a distinguished set ofaccepting states,

†is a finiteinput alphabet,

ıis a function fromQ	†intoQ, called thetransition functionofM.

996Chapter 32String Matching
10
00
ab
input
state
0
1
(a)
a
a
b
b
(b)
01
Figure 32.6A simple two-state finite automaton with state setQD
f
0; 1
g
,startstateq
0
D0,
and input alphabet†D
f
a;b
g
.(a)A tabular representation of the transition functionı.(b)An
equivalent state-transition diagram.  State1, shown blackend, is the only accepting state.  Directed
edges represent transitions.  For example, the edge from state1to state0labeledbindicates that
ı.1;b/D0. This automaton accepts those strings that end in an odd number ofa’s. More precisely,
it accepts a stringxif and only ifxDy ́,whereyD"oryends with ab,and ́Da
k
,wherekis
odd.  For example, on inputabaaa, including the start state, this automaton enters the sequence of
statesh0; 1; 0; 1; 0; 1i, and so it accepts this input. For inputabbaa, it enters the sequence of states
h0; 1; 0; 0; 1; 0i, and so it rejects this input.
The finite automaton begins in stateq
0
and reads the characters of its input string
one at a time.  If the automaton is in stateqand reads input charactera, it moves
(“makes a transition”) from stateqto stateı.q; a/. Whenever its current stateqis
amemberofA, the machineMhasacceptedthe string read so far.  An input that
is not accepted isrejected.
A  finite  automatonMinduces  a  function,  called  thefinal-state function,
from†

toQsuch that.w/is the stateMends up in after scanning the stringw.
Thus,Maccepts a stringwif and only if.w/2A.  We define the function
recursively, using the transition function:
."/Dq
0
;
.wa/Dı..w/; a/forw2†

;a2†.
String-matching automata
For a given patternP, we construct a string-matching automaton in a preprocess-
ing step before using it to search the text string.  Figure 32.7 illustrates  how we
construct the automaton for the patternPDababaca.  From now on, we shall
assume thatPis a given fixed pattern string; for brevity, we shall not indicate the
dependence uponPin our notation.
In order to specify the string-matching automaton corresponding to a given pat-
ternPŒ1::m, we first define an auxiliary function	, called thesuffix function
corresponding toP. The function	maps†

to
f
0; 1; : : : ; m
g
such that	.x/is the
length of the longest prefix ofPthat is also a suffix ofx:
	.x/Dmax
f
kWP
k
x
g
:(32.3)

32.3String matching with finite automata997
01234567
ababaca
b
a
a
a
a
b
(a)
100
120
300
140
500
146
700
120
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
state
input
abc
a
b
a
b
a
c
a
P
(b)
1234567891011
abababacaba
012345456723
—
—
(c)
i
TŒi
state.T
i
/
Figure 32.7  (a)A  state-transition  diagram  for  the  string-matching  automaton  that  accepts  all
strings ending in the stringababaca.  State0is the start state, and state7(shown blackened) is
the only accepting state. A directed edge from stateito statejlabeledarepresentsı.i; a/Dj.The
right-going edges forming the “spine” of the automaton, shown heavy in the figure, correspond to
successful matches between pattern and input characters. The left-going edges correspond to failing
matches.  Some edges corresponding to failing matches are omitted; by convention, if a stateihas
no outgoing edge labeledafor somea2†,thenı.i; a/D0.(b)The corresponding transition
functionı, and the pattern stringPDababaca. The entries corresponding to successful matches
between pattern and input characters are shown shaded.(c)The operation of the automaton on the
textTDabababacaba.  Under each text characterTŒiappears the state.T
i
/that the automa-
ton is in after processing the prefixT
i
. The automaton finds one occurrence of the pattern, ending in
position 9.
The  suffix  function	is  well  defined  since  the  empty  stringP
0
D"is  a  suf-
fix of every string.   As examples,  for the patternPDab,wehave	."/D0,
	.ccaca/D1,and	.ccab/D2.   For  a  patternPof  lengthm,wehave
	.x/Dmif  and  only  ifPx.   From  the  definition  of  the  suffix  function,
xyimplies	.x/	.y/.
We define  the  string-matching  automaton  that  corresponds  to  a  given  pattern
PŒ1::mas follows:

998Chapter 32String Matching

The state setQis
f
0; 1; : : : ; m
g
. The start stateq
0
is state0, and statemis the
only accepting state.

The transition functionıis defined by the following equation, for any stateq
and charactera:
ı.q; a/D	.P
q
a/ :(32.4)
We defi neı.q; a/D	.P
q
a/because we want to keep track of the longest pre-
fix of the patternPthat has matched  the text stringTso far.   We consider  the
most recently read characters  ofT.  In order for a substring  ofT—let’s say the
substring ending atTŒi—to match some prefixP
j
ofP,thisprefixP
j
must be a
suffix ofT
i
.  Suppose thatqD.T
i
/, so that after readingT
i
, the automaton is in
stateq. We design the transition functionıso that this state number,q, tells us the
length of the longest prefix ofPthat matches a suffix ofT
i
.  That is, in stateq,
P
q
T
i
andqD	.T
i
/. (WheneverqDm,allmcharacters ofPmatch a suffix
ofT
i
, and so we have found a match.)  Thus, since.T
i
/and	.T
i
/both equalq,
we shall see (in Theorem 32.4, below) that the automaton maintains the following
invariant:
.T
i
/D	.T
i
/:(32.5)
If the automaton is in stateqand reads the next characterTŒiC1Da,thenwe
want the transition to lead to the state corresponding to the longest prefix ofPthat
is a suffix ofT
i
a, and that state is	.T
i
a/.  BecauseP
q
is the longest prefix ofP
that is a suffix ofT
i
, the longest prefix ofPthat is a suffix ofT
i
ais not only	.T
i
a/,
but  also	.P
q
a/.   (Lemma 32.3,  on  page  1000,  proves  that	.T
i
a/D	.P
q
a/.)
Thus, when the automaton is in stateq, we want the transition function on charac-
terato take the automaton to state	.P
q
a/.
There are two cases to consider.  In the first case,aDPŒqC1, so that the
characteracontinues to match the pattern; in this case, becauseı.q; a/DqC1,the
transition continues to go along the “spine” of the automaton (the heavy edges in
Figure 32.7). In the second case,a¤PŒqC1,sothatadoes not continue to match
the pattern.  Here, we must find a smaller prefix ofPthat is also a suffix ofT
i
.
Because the preprocessing step matches the pattern against itself when creating the
string-matching  automaton,  the transition  function  quickly  identifies  the longest
such smaller prefix ofP.
Let’s look at an example.   The string-matching  automaton  of Figure 32.7 has
ı.5;c/D6,  illustrating  the  first case,  in which  the  match continues.   To illus-
trate the second case, observe that the automaton of Figure 32.7 hası.5;b/D4.
We make this transition because if the automaton reads abin stateqD5,then
P
q
bDababab, and the longest  prefix ofPthat is also a suffix ofabababis
P
4
Dabab.

32.3String matching with finite automata999
x
a
P
r
P
r–1
Figure 32.8An illustration for the proof of Lemma 32.2.  The figure shows thatr	.x/C1,
whererD	.xa/.
To clarify the operation of a string-matching automaton, we now give a simple,
efficient program for simulating the behavior  of such an automaton (represented
by its transition functionı) in finding occurrences of a patternPof lengthmin an
input textTŒ1::n. As for any string-matching automaton for a pattern of lengthm,
the state setQis
f
0; 1; : : : ; m
g
, the start state is0, and the only accepting state is
statem.
F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R.T;ı;m/
1nDT:length
2qD0
3foriD1ton
4qDı.q; T Œi/
5ifq
==m
6print “Pattern occurs with shift”im
From the simple loop structure of F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R, we can easily
see  that  its  matching  time  on  a  text  string  of  lengthnis‚.n/.   This  matching
time,  however,  does not include the preprocessing  time required to compute the
transition  functionı.   We address  this  problem  later,  after  first proving  that  the
procedure F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E Roperates correctly.
Consider how the automaton operates on an input textTŒ1::n. We shall prove
that the automaton is in state	.T
i
/after scanning characterTŒi.Since	.T
i
/Dm
if and only ifPT
i
, the machine is in the accepting statemif and only if it has
just scanned the patternP. To prove this result, we make use of the following two
lemmas about the suffix function	.
Lemma 32.2 (Suffix-function inequality)
For any stringxand charactera,wehave	.xa/	.x/C1.
ProofReferring to Figure 32.8, letrD	.xa/.IfrD0, then the conclusion
	.xa/Dr	.x/C1is trivially satisfied, by the nonnegativity of	.x/.Now
assume thatr>0.  Then,P
r
xa, by the definition of	.  Thus,P
r1
x,by

1000Chapter 32String Matching
x
a
a
P
q
P
r
Figure 32.9An illustration for the proof  of Lemma 32.3.   The figure shows  thatrD	.P
q
a/,
whereqD	.x/andrD	.xa/.
dropping theafrom the end ofP
r
and from the end ofxa. Therefore,r1	.x/,
since	.x/is the largestksuch thatP
k
x, and thus	.xa/Dr	.x/C1.
Lemma 32.3 (Suffix-function recursion lemma)
For any stringxand charactera,ifqD	.x/,then	.xa/D	.P
q
a/.
ProofFrom the definition  of	,wehaveP
q
x.  As Figure 32.9 shows,  we
also haveP
q
axa.IfweletrD	.xa/,thenP
r
xaand, by Lemma 32.2,
rqC1. Thus, we have
j
P
r
j
DrqC1D
j
P
q
a
j
.SinceP
q
axa,P
r
xa,
and
j
P
r
j

j
P
q
a
j
, Lemma 32.1 implies thatP
r
P
q
a.  Therefore,r	.P
q
a/,
that is,	.xa/	.P
q
a/.  But we also have	.P
q
a/	.xa/,sinceP
q
axa.
Thus,	.xa/D	.P
q
a/.
We are now ready to prove our main theorem characterizing the behavior of a
string-matching  automaton  on a given input  text.   As noted above,  this theorem
shows  that  the  automaton  is  merely  keeping  track,  at  each  step,  of  the  longest
prefix of the pattern that is a suffix of what has been read so far.  In other words,
the automaton maintains the invariant (32.5).
Theorem 32.4
Ifis the final-state function of a string-matching automaton for a given patternP
andTŒ1::nis an input text for the automaton, then
.T
i
/D	.T
i
/
foriD0; 1; : : : ; n.
ProofThe proof is by induction oni.ForiD0, the theorem is trivially true,
sinceT
0
D". Thus,.T
0
/D0D	.T
0
/.

32.3String matching with finite automata1001
Now, we assume that.T
i
/D	.T
i
/and prove that.T
iC1
/D	.T
iC1
/.Letq
denote.T
i
/,andletadenoteTŒiC1. Then,
.T
iC1
/D.T
i
a/(by the definitions ofT
iC1
anda)
Dı..T
i
/; a/(by the definition of)
Dı.q; a/(by the definition ofq)
D	.P
q
a/(by the definition (32.4) ofı)
D	.T
i
a/(by Lemma 32.3 and induction)
D	.T
iC1
/(by the definition ofT
iC1
).
By Theorem 32.4, if the machine enters stateqon line 4, thenqis the largest
value such thatP
q
T
i
.  Thus, we haveqDmon line 5 if and only if the ma-
chine has just scanned an occurrence of the patternP.  We conclude that F
INITE-
A
UTOMATON-MAT C H E Roperates correctly.
Computing the transition function
The following procedure computes the transition functionıfrom a given pattern
PŒ1::m.
C
OMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTION.P; †/
1mDP:length
2forqD0tom
3foreach charactera2†
4kDmin.mC1; qC2/
5repeat
6kDk1
7untilP
k
P
q
a
8ı.q; a/Dk
9returnı
This procedure computesı.q; a/in a straightforward manner according to its def-
inition in equation (32.4).  The nested loops beginning on lines 2 and 3 consider
all statesqand all charactersa, and lines 4–8 setı.q; a/to be the largestksuch
thatP
k
P
q
a.  The code starts with the largest conceivable value ofk,whichis
min.m; qC1/. It then decreaseskuntilP
k
P
q
a, which must eventually occur,
sinceP
0
D"is a suffix of every string.
The  running  time  of  C
OMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTIONisO.m
3
j
†
j
/,be-
cause the outer loops contribute a factor ofm
j
†
j
, the innerrepeatloop can run
at mostmC1times, and the testP
k
P
q
aon line 7 can require comparing up

1002Chapter 32String Matching
tomcharacters.   Much faster procedures  exist;  by utilizing  some cleverly com-
puted information about the patternP(see Exercise 32.4-8), we can improve the
time required to computeıfromPtoO.m
j
†
j
/. With this improved procedure for
computingı, we can find all occurrences of a length-mpattern in a length-ntext
over an alphabet†withO.m
j
†
j
/preprocessing time and‚.n/matching time.
Exercises
32.3-1
Construct the string-matching automaton for the patternPDaababand illustrate
its operation on the text stringTDaaababaabaababaab.
32.3-2
Draw a state-transition  diagram  for  a string-matching  automaton  for the  pattern
ababbabbababbababbabbover the alphabet†D
f
a;b
g
.
32.3-3
We call a patternPnonoverlappableifP
k
P
q
implieskD0orkDq.De-
scribe the state-transition diagram of the string-matching automaton for a nonover-
lappable pattern.
32.3-4?
Given two patternsPandP
0
,  describe how to construct a finite automaton that
determines all occurrences ofeitherpattern. Try to minimize the number of states
in your automaton.
32.3-5
Given a patternPcontaining gap characters (see Exercise 32.1-4), show how to
build  a  finite  automaton  that  can  find  an  occurrence  ofPin  a  textTinO.n/
matching time, wherenD
j
T
j
.
?32.4  The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
We now present a linear-time string-matching algorithm due to Knuth, Morris, and
Pratt. This algorithm avoids computing the transition functionıaltogether, and its
matching time is‚.n/using just an auxiliary function, which we precompute
from the pattern in time‚.m/and store in an arrayŒ1::m. The arrayallows
us to compute the transition functionıefficiently (in an amortized sense) “on the
fly” as needed.  Loosely speaking, for any stateqD0; 1; : : : ; mand any character

32.4The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm1003
a2†,thevalueŒqcontains the information we need to computeı.q; a/but
that does not depend ona.  Since the arrayhas onlymentries, whereasıhas
‚.m
j
†
j
/entries, we save a factor of
j
†
j
in the preprocessing time by computing
rather thanı.
The prefix function for a pattern
The prefix  functionfor  a pattern  encapsulates  knowledge  about  how  the  pat-
tern matches against shifts of itself.  We can take advantage of this information to
avoid testing useless shifts in the naive pattern-matching  algorithm  and to avoid
precomputing the full transition functionıfor a string-matching automaton.
Consider  the  operation  of  the  naive  string  matcher.   Figure  32.10(a)  shows  a
particular  shiftsof a template containing  the patternPDababacaagainst a
textT.  For this example,qD5of the characters have matched successfully, but
the6th pattern character fails to match the corresponding text character. The infor-
mation thatqcharacters have matched successfully determines the corresponding
text characters.  Knowing theseqtext characters allows us to determine immedi-
ately that certain shifts are invalid.  In the example of the figure, the shiftsC1is
necessarily invalid, since the first pattern character (a) would be aligned with a text
character that we know does not match the first pattern character, but does match
the second pattern character (b). The shifts
0
DsC2shown in part (b) of the fig-
ure, however, aligns the first three pattern characters with three text characters that
must necessarily match. In general, it is useful to know the answer to the following
question:
Given that pattern charactersPŒ1::qmatch text charactersTŒsC1::sCq,
what is the least shifts
0
>ssuch that for somek<q,
PŒ1::kDTŒs
0
C1::s
0
Ck ;(32.6)
wheres
0
CkDsCq?
In other words,  knowing thatP
q
T
sCq
, we want the longest proper prefixP
k
ofP
q
that  is  also  a  suffix ofT
sCq
.(Sinces
0
CkDsCq,ifwearegivens
andq, then finding the smallest shifts
0
is tantamount to finding the longest prefix
lengthk.) We add the differenceqkin the lengths of these prefixes ofPto the
shiftsto arrive at our new shifts
0
,sothats
0
DsC.qk/. In the best case,kD0,
so thats
0
DsCq, and we immediately rule out shiftssC1; sC2;:::;sCq1.
In any case, at the new shifts
0
we don’t need to compare the firstkcharacters ofP
with the corresponding characters ofT, since equation (32.6) guarantees that they
match.
We can precompute the necessary information by comparing the pattern against
itself,  as Figure  32.10(c)  demonstrates.   SinceTŒs
0
C1::s
0
Ckis  part  of the

1004Chapter 32String Matching
bacbab
aba
(a)
abaabcbab
baca
s
T
P
q
bacbab
aba
(b)
abaabcbab
baca
s′ = s + 2
T
P
k
ab
aba
aba
(c)
P
q
P
k
Figure 32.10The prefix function.(a)The patternPDababacaaligns with a textTso that
the firstqD5characters match. Matching characters, shown shaded, are connected by vertical lines.
(b)Using only our knowledge of the5matched characters, we can deduce that a shift ofsC1is
invalid, but that a shift ofs
0
DsC2is consistent with everything we know about the text and therefore
is potentially valid.(c)We can precompute useful information for such deductions by comparing the
pattern with itself. Here, we see that the longest prefix ofPthat is also a proper suffix ofP
5
isP
3
.
We represent this precomputed information in the array,sothatŒ5D3. Given thatqcharacters
have matched successfully at shifts, the next potentially valid shift is ats
0
DsC.qŒq/as shown
in part (b).
known portion of the text, it is a suffix of the stringP
q
. Therefore, we can interpret
equation (32.6) as asking for the greatestk<qsuch thatP
k
P
q
. Then, the new
shifts
0
DsC.qk/is the next potentially valid shift. We will find it convenient to
store, for each value ofq, the numberkof matching characters at the new shifts
0
,
rather than storing, say,s
0
s.
We formalize the information that we precompute as follows.  Given a pattern
PŒ1::m,theprefix functionfor the patternPis the functionW
f
1;2;:::;m
g
!
f
0; 1; : : : ; m1
g
such that
ŒqDmax
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
:
That is,Œqis the length of the longest prefix ofPthat is a proper suffix ofP
q
.
Figure 32.11(a) gives the complete prefix functionfor the patternababaca.

32.4The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm1005
1234567
0012301
ababaca
(a)
ababaca
ababaca
ababaca
ababaca
(b)
"
i
PŒi
Œi
P
5
P
3
P
1
P
0
Œ5D3
Œ3D1
Œ1D0
Figure 32.11An illustration of Lemma 32.5 for the patternPDababacaandqD5.(a)The
function for the given pattern.  SinceŒ5D3,Œ3D1,andŒ1D0, by iteratingwe obtain


Œ5D
f
3; 1; 0
g
.(b)We slide the template containing the patternPto the right and note when some
prefixP
k
ofPmatches up with some proper suffix ofP
5
; we get matches whenkD3,1,and0.In
the figure, the first row givesP, and the dotted vertical line is drawn just afterP
5
. Successive rows
show all the shifts ofPthat cause some prefixP
k
ofPto match some suffix ofP
5
.  Successfully
matched characters are shown shaded.   Verticallines connect aligned matching characters.  Thus,
f
kWk<5andP
k
P
5
g
D
f
3; 1; 0
g
.  Lemma 32.5 claims that

ŒqD
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
for allq.
The  pseudocode  below  gives  the  Knuth-Morris-Pratt  matching  algorithm  as
the procedure  KMP-M
AT C H E R.   For the most part,  the procedure  follows from
F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R, as we shall see. KMP-MAT C H E Rcalls the aux-
iliary procedure C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONto compute.
KMP-M
AT C H E R.T; P /
1nDT:length
2mDP:length
3DC
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION.P /
4qD0//number of characters matched
5foriD1ton//scan the text from left to right
6whileq>0andPŒqC1¤TŒi
7qDŒq//next character does not match
8ifPŒqC1
==TŒi
9qDqC1//next character matches
10ifq
==m//is all ofPmatched?
11print “Pattern occurs with shift”im
12qDŒq//look for the next match

1006Chapter 32String Matching
COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION.P /
1mDP:length
2letŒ1::mbe a new array
3Œ1D0
4kD0
5forqD2tom
6whilek>0andPŒkC1¤PŒq
7kDŒk
8ifPŒkC1
==PŒq
9kDkC1
10ŒqDk
11return
These two procedures have much in common, because both match a string against
the patternP:KMP-M
AT C H E Rmatches the textTagainstP,andCOMPUTE-
P
REFIX-FUNCTIONmatchesPagainst itself.
We begin with an analysis  of the running  times of these procedures.   Proving
these procedures correct will be more complicated.
Running-time analysis
The running time of C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONis‚.m/, which we show by
using  the  aggregate  method  of  amortized  analysis  (see  Section  17.1).   The only
tricky part is showing that thewhileloop of lines 6–7 executesO.m/times alto-
gether.  We shall show that it makes at mostm1iterations.  We start by making
some  observations  aboutk.   First,  line  4 startskat0,  and  the only  way thatk
increases is by the increment operation in line 9, which executes at most once per
iteration of theforloop of lines 5–10. Thus, the total increase inkis at mostm1.
Second, sincek<qupon entering theforloop and each iteration of the loop in-
crementsq,wealwayshavek<q.  Therefore, the assignments in lines 3 and 10
ensure thatŒq < qfor allqD1;2;:::;m, which means that each iteration of
thewhileloop decreasesk.  Third,knever becomes negative.  Putting these facts
together, we see that the total decrease inkfrom thewhileloop is bounded from
above by the total increase inkover all iterations of theforloop, which ism1.
Thus, thewhileloop iterates at mostm1times in all, and C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-
F
UNCTIONruns in time‚.m/.
Exercise 32.4-4 asks you to show, by a similar aggregate analysis, that the match-
ing time of KMP-M
AT C H E Ris‚.n/.
Compared with F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R,byusingrather thanı,we
have reduced the time for preprocessing the pattern fromO.m
j
†
j
/to‚.m/, while
keeping the actual matching time bounded by‚.n/.

32.4The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm1007
Correctness of the prefix-function computation
We shall see a little later that the prefix functionhelps us simulate the transition
functionıin a string-matching  automaton.   But first,  we need  to prove that the
procedure  C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONdoes indeed  compute  the prefix func-
tion correctly. In order to do so, we will need to find all prefixesP
k
that are proper
suffixes of a given prefixP
q
.ThevalueofŒqgives us the longest such prefix, but
the following lemma, illustrated in Figure 32.11, shows that by iterating the prefix
function, we can indeed enumerate all the prefixesP
k
that are proper suffixes
ofP
q
.Let


ŒqDfŒq;
.2/
Œq; 
.3/
Œq;:::;
.t /
Œqg;
where
.i /
Œqis defined in terms of functional iteration, so that
.0/
ŒqDqand

.i /
ŒqDŒ
.i1/
Œqfori1,  and where the sequence  in

Œqstops  upon
reaching
.t /
ŒqD0.
Lemma 32.5 (Prefix-function iteration lemma)
LetPbe a pattern of lengthmwith prefix function. Then, forqD1;2;:::;m,
we have

ŒqD
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
.
ProofWe first prove that

Œq
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
or, equivalently,
i2

ŒqimpliesP
i
P
q
:(32.7)
Ifi2

Œq,theniD
.u/
Œqfor  someu>0.   We prove equation  (32.7)  by
induction onu.ForuD1,wehaveiDŒq, and the claim follows sincei<q
andP
Œq
P
q
by the definition of. Using the relationsŒi < iandP
Œi
P
i
and the transitivity of<andestablishes the claim for alliin

Œq.  Therefore,


Œq
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
.
We now prove that
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g


Œqby contradiction.  Sup-
pose  to  the  contrary  that  the  set
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g


Œqis  nonempty,
and letjbe the largest  number  in the set.   BecauseŒqis the largest  value in
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
andŒq2

Œq,wemusthavej<Œq,andsowe
letj
0
denote the smallest integer in

Œqthat is greater thanj.  (We can choose
j
0
DŒqif no other number in

Œqis greater thanj.) We haveP
j
P
q
because
j2
f
kWk<qandP
k
P
q
g
, and fromj
0
2

Œqand equation (32.7), we have
P
j
0
P
q
.  Thus,P
j
P
j
0
by Lemma 32.1, andjis the largest value less thanj
0
with this property.  Therefore, we must haveŒj
0
Djand, sincej
0
2

Œq,we
must havej2

Œqas well. This contradiction proves the lemma.
The algorithm COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONcomputesŒq,inorder,forqD
1;2;:::;m.  SettingŒ1to0in line 3 of C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONis cer-
tainly correct,  sinceŒq < qfor allq.  We shall use the following lemma and

1008Chapter 32String Matching
its corollary to prove that COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONcomputesŒqcorrectly
forq>1.
Lemma 32.6
LetPbe a pattern of lengthm,andletbe the prefix function forP.ForqD
1;2;:::;m,ifŒq > 0,thenŒq12

Œq1.
ProofLetrDŒq > 0,sothatr<qandP
r
P
q
; thus,r1<q1and
P
r1
P
q1
(by dropping the last character fromP
r
andP
q
, which we can do
becauser>0).  By Lemma 32.5, therefore,r12

Œq1.  Thus, we have
Œq1Dr12

Œq1.
ForqD2;3;:::;m, define the subsetE
q1


Œq1by
E
q1
D
f
k2

Œq1WPŒkC1DPŒq
g
D
f
kWk<q1andP
k
P
q1
andPŒkC1DPŒq
g
(by Lemma 32.5)
D
f
kWk<q1andP
kC1
P
q
g
:
The setE
q1
consists of the valuesk<q1for whichP
k
P
q1
and for which,
becausePŒkC1DPŒq,wehaveP
kC1
P
q
.  Thus,E
q1
consists of those
valuesk2

Œq1such that we can extendP
k
toP
kC1
and get a proper suffix
ofP
q
.
Corollary 32.7
LetPbe a pattern of lengthm,andletbe the prefix function forP.ForqD
2;3;:::;m,
ŒqD
(
0ifE
q1
D;;
1Cmax
f
k2E
q1
g
ifE
q1
¤;:
ProofIfE
q1
is empty, there is nok2

Œq1(includingkD0)forwhich
we can extendP
k
toP
kC1
and get a proper suffix ofP
q
. ThereforeŒqD0.
IfE
q1
is nonempty, then for eachk2E
q1
we havekC1<qandP
kC1
P
q
.
Therefore, from the definition ofŒq,wehave
Œq1Cmax
f
k2E
q1
g
:(32.8)
Note  thatŒq  >  0.LetrDŒq1,sothatrC1DŒqand  there-
foreP
rC1
P
q
.SincerC1>0,wehavePŒrC1DPŒq.   Furthermore,
by  Lemma  32.6,  we  haver2

Œq1.   Therefore,r2E
q1
,andsor
max
f
k2E
q1
g
or, equivalently,
Œq1Cmax
f
k2E
q1
g
:(32.9)
Combining equations (32.8) and (32.9) completes the proof.

32.4The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm1009
We now finish the proof that COMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTIONcomputescor-
rectly.  In the procedure  C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION,  at the start of each iter-
ation of theforloop of lines 5–10,  we have thatkDŒq1.  This condition
is enforced by lines 3 and 4 when the loop is first entered, and it remains true in
each successive iteration because of line 10. Lines 6–9 adjustkso that it becomes
the correct value ofŒq.Thewhileloop of lines 6–7 searches through all values
k2

Œq1until it finds a value ofkfor whichPŒkC1DPŒq; at that point,
kis the largest value in the setE
q1
, so that, by Corollary 32.7, we can setŒq
tokC1.Ifthewhileloop cannot find ak2

Œq1such thatPŒkC1DPŒq,
thenkequals0at line 8. IfPŒ1DPŒq, then we should set bothkandŒqto1;
otherwise we should leavekalone and setŒqto0.  Lines 8–10 setkandŒq
correctly in either case. This completes our proof of the correctness of C
OMPUTE-
P
REFIX-FUNCTION.
Correctness of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm
We can think  of the procedure  KMP-M
AT C H E Ras a reimplemented  version  of
the procedure  F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R,  but using the prefix function
to compute state transitions. Specifically, we shall prove that in theith iteration of
theforloops of both KMP-M
AT C H E Rand FINITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R,the
stateqhas the same value when we test for equality withm(at line 10 in KMP-
M
AT C H E Rand  at  line  5  in  FINITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R).    Once  we  have
argued  that  KMP-M
AT C H E Rsimulates  the  behavior  of  FINITE-AUTOMATON-
M
AT C H E R,  the correctness  of  KMP-MAT C H E Rfollows from the correctness  of
F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R(though we shall see a little later why line 12 in
KMP-M
AT C H E Ris necessary).
Before  we  formally  prove  that  KMP-M
AT C H E Rcorrectly  simulates  FINITE-
A
UTOMATON-MAT C H E R, let’s take a moment to understand how the prefix func-
tionreplaces  theıtransition  function.    Recall  that  when  a  string-matching
automaton  is  in  stateqand  it  scans  a  characteraDTŒi,  it  moves  to  a  new
stateı.q; a/.IfaDPŒqC1,sothatacontinues  to  match  the  pattern,  then
ı.q; a/DqC1.  Otherwise,a¤PŒqC1,sothatadoes not continue to match
the pattern,  and0ı.q; a/q.  In the first case, whenacontinues to match,
KMP-M
AT C H E Rmoves to stateqC1without referring  to thefunction:  the
whileloop test in line 6 comes up false the first time, the test in line 8 comes up
true, and line 9 incrementsq.
Thefunction comes into play when the characteradoes not continue to match
the pattern, so that the new stateı.q; a/is eitherqor to the left ofqalong the spine
of the automaton. Thewhileloop of lines 6–7 in KMP-M
AT C H E Riterates through
the states in

Œq, stopping either when it arrives in a state,  sayq
0
, such thata
matchesPŒq
0
C1orq
0
has gone all the way down to0.IfamatchesPŒq
0
C1,

1010Chapter 32String Matching
then line 9 sets the new state toq
0
C1, which should equalı.q; a/for the simulation
to work correctly.  In other words, the new stateı.q; a/should be either state0or
one greater than some state in

Œq.
Let’s look at the example in Figures 32.7 and 32.11, which are for the pattern
PDababaca.   Suppose  that  the  automaton  is  in  stateqD5;  the  states  in


Œ5are, in descending order,3,1,and0. If the next character scanned isc,then
we can easily see that the automaton moves to stateı.5;c/D6in both F
INITE-
A
UTOMATON-MAT C H E Rand KMP-MAT C H E R.  Now suppose that the next char-
acter scanned is insteadb, so that the automaton should move to stateı.5;b/D4.
Thewhileloop in KMP-M
AT C H E Rexits having executed line 7 once, and it ar-
rives in stateq
0
DŒ5D3.SincePŒq
0
C1DPŒ4Db, the test in line 8
comes up true, and KMP-M
AT C H E Rmoves to the new stateq
0
C1D4Dı.5;b/.
Finally, suppose that the next character scanned is insteada, so that the automa-
ton should move to stateı.5;a/D1.  The first three times that the test in line 6
executes, the test comes up true.  The first time, we find thatPŒ6Dc¤a,and
KMP-M
AT C H E Rmoves to stateŒ5D3(the first state in

Œ5).  The second
time, we find thatPŒ4Db¤aand move to stateŒ3D1(the second state
in

Œ5). The third time, we find thatPŒ2Db¤aand move to stateŒ1D0
(the last state in

Œ5). Thewhileloop exits once it arrives in stateq
0
D0.Now,
line 8 finds thatPŒq
0
C1DPŒ1Da, and line 9 moves the automaton to the new
stateq
0
C1D1Dı.5;a/.
Thus, our intuition is that KMP-M
AT C H E Riterates through the states in

Œqin
decreasing order, stopping at some stateq
0
and then possibly moving to stateq
0
C1.
Although that might seem like a lot of work just to simulate computingı.q; a/,
bear  in  mind  that  asymptotically,  KMP-M
AT C H E Ris  no  slower  than  FINITE-
A
UTOMATON-MAT C H E R.
We are now ready to formally prove the correctness of the Knuth-Morris-Pratt
algorithm.  By Theorem 32.4, we have thatqD	.T
i
/after each time we execute
line 4 of F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R.  Therefore, it suffices to show that the
same property holds with regard to theforloop in KMP-M
AT C H E R.  The proof
proceeds by induction on the number of loop iterations.  Initially, both procedures
setqto0as they enter their respectiveforloops for the first time.  Consider itera-
tioniof theforloop in KMP-M
AT C H E R,andletq
0
be state at the start of this loop
iteration.  By the inductive hypothesis, we haveq
0
D	.T
i1
/.  We need to show
thatqD	.T
i
/at line 10. (Again, we shall handle line 12 separately.)
When we consider the characterTŒi, the longest prefix ofPthat is a suffix ofT
i
is eitherP
q
0
C1
(ifPŒq
0
C1DTŒi) or some prefix (not necessarily proper, and
possibly empty) ofP
q
0
. We consider separately the three cases in which	.T
i
/D0,
	.T
i
/Dq
0
C1,and0<	.T
i
/q
0
.

32.4The Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm1011

If	.T
i
/D0,thenP
0
D"is the only prefix ofPthat is a suffix ofT
i
.Thewhile
loop of lines 6–7 iterates through the values in

Œq
0
, but althoughP
q
T
i
for
everyq2

Œq
0
, the loop never finds aqsuch thatPŒqC1DTŒi. The loop
terminates whenqreaches0, and of course line 9 does not execute. Therefore,
qD0at line 10, so thatqD	.T
i
/.

If	.T
i
/Dq
0
C1,thenPŒq
0
C1DTŒi,andthewhileloop test in line 6
fails the first time through.  Line 9 executes, incrementingqso that afterward
we haveqDq
0
C1D	.T
i
/.

If0<	.T
i
/q
0
,  then  thewhileloop  of  lines  6–7  iterates  at  least  once,
checking in decreasing order each valueq2

Œq
0
until it stops at someq<q
0
.
Thus,P
q
is the longest prefix ofP
q
0
for whichPŒqC1DTŒi, so that when the
whileloop terminates,qC1D	.P
q
0
TŒi/.Sinceq
0
D	.T
i1
/, Lemma 32.3
implies that	.T
i1
TŒi/D	.P
q
0
TŒi/. Thus, we have
qC1D	.P
q
0
TŒi/
D	.T
i1
TŒi/
D	.T
i
/
when thewhileloop terminates. After line 9 incrementsq,wehaveqD	.T
i
/.
Line 12 is necessary in KMP-M
AT C H E R,  because otherwise,  we might refer-
encePŒmC1on line  6 after  finding an occurrence  ofP.   (The argument  that
qD	.T
i1
/upon the next execution of line 6 remains valid by the hint given in
Exercise 32.4-8:ı.m; a/Dı.Œm; a/or, equivalently,	.Pa/D	.P
Œm
a/for
anya2†.)  The remaining argument  for the correctness  of the Knuth-Morris-
Pratt algorithm follows from the correctness of F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R,
sincewehaveshownthatKMP-M
AT C H E Rsimulates  the  behavior  of  FINITE-
A
UTOMATON-MAT C H E R.
Exercises
32.4-1
Compute the prefix functionfor the patternababbabbabbababbabb.
32.4-2
Give an upper bound on the size of

Œqas a function ofq.  Give an example to
show that your bound is tight.
32.4-3
Explain how to determine the occurrences of patternPin the textTby examining
thefunction for the stringPT(the string of lengthmCnthat is the concatenation
ofPandT
).

1012Chapter 32String Matching
32.4-4
Use  an  aggregate  analysis  to  show  that  the  running  time  of  KMP-M
AT C H E R
is‚.n/.
32.4-5
Use a potential function to show that the running time of KMP-M
AT C H E Ris‚.n/.
32.4-6
Show how to improve KMP-M
AT C H E Rby replacing the occurrence ofin line 7
(but not line 12) by
0
,where
0
is defined recursively forqD1;2;:::;m1by
the equation

0
ŒqD

0ifŒqD0;

0
ŒŒqifŒq¤0andPŒŒqC1DPŒqC1 ;
ŒqifŒq¤0andPŒŒqC1¤PŒqC1 :
Explain  why  the  modified  algorithm  is  correct,  and  explain  in  what  sense  this
change constitutes an improvement.
32.4-7
Give a linear-time algorithm to determine whether a textTis a cyclic rotation of
another stringT
0
. For example,arcandcarare cyclic rotations of each other.
32.4-8?
Give anO.m
j
†
j
/-time algorithm for computing the transition functionıfor the
string-matching automaton corresponding to a given patternP.(Hint:Prove that
ı.q; a/Dı.Œq; a/ifqDmorPŒqC1¤a.)
Problems
32-1  String matching based on repetition factors
Lety
i
denote  the  concatenation  of  stringywith  itselfitimes.   For  example,
.ab/
3
Dababab. We say that a stringx2†

hasrepetition factorrifxDy
r
for some stringy2†

and somer>0.Let.x/denote the largestrsuch thatx
has repetition factorr.
a.Give an efficient algorithm that takes as input a patternPŒ1::mand computes
the value.P
i
/foriD1;2;:::;m.  What is the running time of your algo-
rithm?

Notes for Chapter 321013
b.For any patternPŒ1::m,let

.P /be defined as max
1im
.P
i
/. Prove that if
the patternPis chosen randomly from the set of all binary strings of lengthm,
then the expected value of

.P /isO.1/.
c.Argue that the following string-matching  algorithm  correctly  finds all occur-
rences of patternPin a textTŒ1::nin timeO.

.P /nCm/:
R
EPETITION-MAT C H E R.P; T /
1mDP:length
2nDT:length
3kD1C

.P /
4qD0
5sD0
6whilesnm
7ifTŒsCqC1
==PŒqC1
8qDqC1
9ifq
==m
10print “Pattern occurs with shift”s
11ifq
==morTŒsCqC1¤PŒqC1
12sDsCmax.1;
d
q=k
e
/
13qD0
This algorithm is due to Galil and Seiferas.  By extending these ideas greatly,
they obtained a linear-time string-matching algorithm that uses onlyO.1/stor-
age beyond what is required forPandT.
Chapter notes
The relation  of  string  matching  to the  theory  of finite  automata  is discussed  by
Aho,  Hopcroft,  and  Ullman  [5].   The  Knuth-Morris-Pratt  algorithm  [214]  was
invented  independently  by Knuth  and  Pratt  and  by Morris;  they  published  their
work jointly. Reingold, Urban, and Gries [294] give an alternative treatment of the
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm.  The Rabin-Karp algorithm was proposed by Karp
and Rabin [201].  Galil and Seiferas [126] give an interesting deterministic linear-
time string-matching algorithm that uses onlyO.1/space beyond that required to
store the pattern and text.

33Computational Geometry
Computational geometry is the branch of computer science that studies algorithms
for solving geometric problems.  In modern engineering  and mathematics,  com-
putational geometry has applications in such diverse fields as computer graphics,
robotics,  VLSI design,  computer-aided  design,  molecular  modeling,  metallurgy,
manufacturing, textile layout, forestry, and statistics. The input to a computational-
geometry problem is typically a description of a set of geometric objects, such as
a set of points, a set of line segments, or the vertices of a polygon in counterclock-
wise order.  The output is often a response to a query about the objects,  such as
whether any of the lines intersect, or perhaps a new geometric object, such as the
convex hull (smallest enclosing convex polygon) of the set of points.
In  this  chapter,  we  look  at  a  few  computational-geometry  algorithms  in  two
dimensions,  that  is,  in  the  plane.    We  represent  each  input  object  by  a  set  of
points
f
p
1
;p
2
;p
3
;:::
g
,  where  eachp
i
D.x
i
;y
i
/andx
i
;y
i
2R.Forexam-
ple,  we represent  ann-vertex polygonPby a sequencehp
0
;p
1
;p
2
; :::; p
n1
i
of its vertices in order of their appearance on the boundary ofP.  Computational
geometry can also apply to three dimensions, and even higher-dimensional spaces,
but such problems and their solutions can be very difficult to visualize.  Even in
two dimensions, however, we can see a good sample of computational-geometry
techniques.
Section  33.1  shows  how  to  answer  basic  questions  about  line  segments  effi-
ciently  and  accurately:   whether  one  segment  is  clockwise  or  counterclockwise
from  another  that  shares  an  endpoint,  which  way  we  turn  when  traversing  two
adjoining  line segments,  and whether  two line segments  intersect.   Section 33.2
presents a technique called “sweeping” that we use to develop anO.nlgn/-time
algorithm  for  determining  whether  a  set  ofnline  segments  contains  any  inter-
sections.  Section 33.3 gives two “rotational-sweep”  algorithms that compute the
convex hull (smallest enclosing  convex polygon)  of a set ofnpoints:  Graham’s
scan, which runs in timeO.nlgn/, and Jarvis’s march, which takesO.nh/time,
wherehis the number of vertices of the convex hull.  Finally, Section 33.4 gives

33.1Line-segment properties1015
anO.nlgn/-time  divide-and-conquer  algorithm  for  finding  the  closest  pair  of
points in a set ofnpoints in the plane.
33.1  Line-segment properties
Several of the computational-geometry algorithms in this chapter require answers
to questions about the properties of line segments.  Aconvex combinationof two
distinct pointsp
1
D.x
1
;y
1
/andp
2
D.x
2
;y
2
/is any pointp
3
D.x
3
;y
3
/such
that for some ̨in the range0 ̨1,wehavex
3
D ̨x
1
C.1 ̨/x
2
and
y
3
D ̨y
1
C.1 ̨/y
2
. We also write thatp
3
D ̨p
1
C.1 ̨/p
2
. Intuitively,p
3
is any point that is on the line passing throughp
1
andp
2
and is on or betweenp
1
andp
2
on the line.  Given two distinct pointsp
1
andp
2
,theline segmentp
1
p
2
is the set of convex combinations ofp
1
andp
2
.  We callp
1
andp
2
theendpoints
of segment
p
1
p
2
.  Sometimes the ordering ofp
1
andp
2
matters, and we speak of
thedirected segment
!
p
1
p
2
.Ifp
1
is theorigin.0; 0/, then we can treat the directed
segment
!
p
1
p
2
as thevectorp
2
.
In this section, we shall explore the following questions:
1.  Given two directed  segments
!
p
0
p
1
and
!
p
0
p
2
,is
!
p
0
p
1
clockwise  from
!
p
0
p
2
with respect to their common endpointp
0
?
2.  Given two line segments
p
0
p
1
andp
1
p
2
, if we traversep
0
p
1
and thenp
1
p
2
,
do we make a left turn at pointp
1
?
3.  Do line segments
p
1
p
2
andp
3
p
4
intersect?
There are no restrictions on the given points.
We can answer each question inO.1/time, which should come as no surprise
since the input size of each question isO.1/. Moreover, our methods use only ad-
ditions, subtractions, multiplications, and comparisons.  We need neither division
nor trigonometric functions, both of which can be computationally expensive and
prone to problems with round-off error. For example, the “straightforward” method
of determining whether two segments intersect—compute the line equation of the
formyDmxCbfor  each  segment  (mis the  slope  andbis they-intercept),
find the point of intersection of the lines, and check whether this point is on both
segments—uses division to find the point of intersection.  When the segments are
nearly parallel, this method is very sensitive to the precision of the division opera-
tion on real computers. The method in this section, which avoids division, is much
more accurate.

1016Chapter 33Computational Geometry
p
2
x
y
(0,0)
p
1
p
1
 +
p
2
(a)(b)
y
x
(0,0)
p
Figure 33.1  (a)The cross product of vectorsp
1
andp
2
is the signed area of the parallelogram.
(b)The lightly shaded region contains vectors that are clockwise fromp. The darkly shaded region
contains vectors that are counterclockwise fromp.
Cross products
Computing cross products lies at the heart of our line-segment methods.  Consider
vectorsp
1
andp
2
, shown in Figure 33.1(a).  We can interpret thecross product
p
1
	p
2
as the signed area of the parallelogram formed by the points.0; 0/,p
1
,p
2
,
andp
1
Cp
2
D.x
1
Cx
2
;y
1
Cy
2
/. An equivalent, but more useful, definition gives
the cross product as the determinant of a matrix:
1
p
1
	p
2
Ddet

x
1
x
2
y
1
y
2

Dx
1
y
2
x
2
y
1
Dp
2
	p
1
:
Ifp
1
	p
2
is positive, thenp
1
is clockwise fromp
2
with respect to the origin.0; 0/;
if this cross product is negative, thenp
1
is counterclockwise fromp
2
.(SeeExer-
cise  33.1-1.)   Figure 33.1(b)  shows the  clockwise  and  counterclockwise  regions
relative to a vectorp. A boundary condition arises if the cross product is0;inthis
case, the vectors arecolinear, pointing in either the same or opposite directions.
To  determine  whether  a  directed  segment
!
p
0
p
1
is  closer  to  a  directed  seg-
ment
!
p
0
p
2
in a clockwise direction or in a counterclockwise direction with respect
to their common endpointp
0
, we simply translate to usep
0
as the origin.  That
is,  we letp
1
p
0
denote  the  vectorp
0
1
D.x
0
1
;y
0
1
/,wherex
0
1
Dx
1
x
0
and
y
0
1
Dy
1
y
0
, and we definep
2
p
0
similarly. We then compute the cross product
1
Actually, the cross product is a three-dimensional concept.  It is a vector that is perpendicular to
bothp
1
andp
2
according to the “right-hand rule” and whose magnitude is
j
x
1
y
2
x
2
y
1
j
.Inthis
chapter, however, we find it convenient to treat the cross product simply as the valuex
1
y
2
x
2
y
1
.

33.1Line-segment properties1017
p
0
p
1
p
2
p
0
p
1
p
2
counterclockwise
(a)(b)
clockwise
Figure 33.2Using the cross product to determine how consecutive line segmentsp
0
p
1
andp
1
p
2
turn at pointp
1
.  We check whether the directed segment
!
p
0
p
2
is clockwise or counterclockwise
relative to the directed segment
!
p
0
p
1
.(a)If counterclockwise, the points make a left turn.(b)If
clockwise, they make a right turn.
.p
1
p
0
/	.p
2
p
0
/D.x
1
x
0
/.y
2
y
0
/.x
2
x
0
/.y
1
y
0
/:
If this cross product is positive, then
!
p
0
p
1
is clockwise from
!
p
0
p
2
; if negative, it
is counterclockwise.
Determining whether consecutive segments turn left or right
Our next question is whether two consecutive line segments
p
0
p
1
andp
1
p
2
turn
left or right at pointp
1
. Equivalently, we want a method to determine which way a
given angle†p
0
p
1
p
2
turns. Cross products allow us to answer this question with-
out computing the angle. As Figure 33.2 shows, we simply check whether directed
segment
!
p
0
p
2
is clockwise or counterclockwise relative to directed segment
!
p
0
p
1
.
To do so,  we compute the cross product.p
2
p
0
/	.p
1
p
0
/.  If the sign of
this cross product is negative, then
!
p
0
p
2
is counterclockwise with respect to
!
p
0
p
1
,
and thus we make a left turn atp
1
. A positive cross product indicates a clockwise
orientation and a right turn. A cross product of0means that pointsp
0
,p
1
,andp
2
are colinear.
Determining whether two line segments intersect
To determine whether two line segments intersect, we check whether each segment
straddles the line containing the other. A segment
p
1
p
2
straddlesa line if pointp
1
lies on one side of the line and pointp
2
lies on the other side.  A boundary case
arises ifp
1
orp
2
lies directly on the line.  Two line segments intersect if and only
if either (or both) of the following conditions holds:
1.  Each segment straddles the line containing the other.
2.  An endpoint of one segment lies on the other segment.  (This condition comes
from the boundary case.)

1018Chapter 33Computational Geometry
The following procedures implement this idea. SEGMENTS-INTERSECTreturns
TRUEif  segmentsp
1
p
2
andp
3
p
4
intersect  andFALSEif  they  do  not.   It  calls
the subroutines D
IRECTION, which computes relative orientations using the cross-
product  method  above,  and  O
N-SEGMENT,  which  determines  whether  a  point
known to be colinear with a segment lies on that segment.
S
EGMENTS-INTERSECT.p
1
;p
2
;p
3
;p
4
/
1d
1
DDIRECTION.p
3
;p
4
;p
1
/
2d
2
DDIRECTION.p
3
;p
4
;p
2
/
3d
3
DDIRECTION.p
1
;p
2
;p
3
/
4d
4
DDIRECTION.p
1
;p
2
;p
4
/
5if..d
1
>0andd
2
<0/or.d
1
<0andd
2
>0//and
..d
3
>0andd
4
<0/or.d
3
<0andd
4
>0//
6return
TRUE
7elseifd
1
==0and ON-SEGMENT.p
3
;p
4
;p
1
/
8return
TRUE
9elseifd
2
==0and ON-SEGMENT.p
3
;p
4
;p
2
/
10return
TRUE
11elseifd
3
==0and ON-SEGMENT.p
1
;p
2
;p
3
/
12return
TRUE
13elseifd
4
==0and ON-SEGMENT.p
1
;p
2
;p
4
/
14return
TRUE
15else returnFALSE
DIRECTION.p
i
;p
j
;p
k
/
1return.p
k
p
i
/	.p
j
p
i
/
O
N-SEGMENT.p
i
;p
j
;p
k
/
1ifmin.x
i
;x
j
/x
k
max.x
i
;x
j
/and min.y
i
;y
j
/y
k
max.y
i
;y
j
/
2return
TRUE
3else returnFALSE
SEGMENTS-INTERSECTworks as follows.  Lines 1–4 compute the relative ori-
entationd
i
of each endpointp
i
with respect to the other segment. If all the relative
orientations  are  nonzero,  then  we  can  easily  determine  whether  segments
p
1
p
2
andp
3
p
4
intersect,  as follows.  Segmentp
1
p
2
straddles the line containing seg-
ment
p
3
p
4
if directed segments
!
p
3
p
1
and
!
p
3
p
2
have opposite orientations relative
to
!
p
3
p
4
.   In  this  case,  the  signs  ofd
1
andd
2
differ.   Similarly,p
3
p
4
straddles
the line containing
p
1
p
2
if the signs ofd
3
andd
4
differ.   If the test of line 5 is
true, then the segments straddle each other, and S
EGMENTS-INTERSECTreturns
TRUE.  Figure 33.3(a) shows this case.  Otherwise,  the segments do not straddle

33.1Line-segment properties1019
p
1
p
2
p
3
p
4
(p
1
–p
3
)× (p
4
–p
3
) < 0
(p
4
–p
1
)× (p
2
–p
1
) < 0
(p
2
–p
3
)× (p
4
–p
3
) > 0
(p
3
–p
1
)× (p
2
–p
1
) > 0
(a)
p
1
p
2
p
3
p
4
(p
1
–p
3
)× (p
4
–p
3
) < 0
(p
4
–p
1
)× (p
2
–p
1
) < 0
(p
2
–p
3
)× (p
4
–p
3
) < 0
(p
3
–p
1
)× (p
2
–p
1
) > 0
(b)
p
1
p
2
p
3
p
4
(c)
p
1
p
2
p
3
p
4
(d)
Figure 33.3Cases in the procedure SEGMENTS-INTERSECT.(a)The segmentsp
1
p
2
andp
3
p
4
straddle each other’s lines. Becausep
3
p
4
straddles the line containingp
1
p
2
, the signs of the cross
products.p
3
p
1
/	.p
2
p
1
/and.p
4
p
1
/	.p
2
p
1
/differ. Becausep
1
p
2
straddles the line
containing
p
3
p
4
, the signs of the cross products.p
1
p
3
/	.p
4
p
3
/and.p
2
p
3
/	.p
4
p
3
/
differ.(b)Segment
p
3
p
4
straddles the line containingp
1
p
2
,butp
1
p
2
does not straddle the line
containing
p
3
p
4
. The signs of the cross products.p
1
p
3
/	.p
4
p
3
/and.p
2
p
3
/	.p
4
p
3
/
are the same.(c)Pointp
3
is colinear withp
1
p
2
and is betweenp
1
andp
2
.(d)Pointp
3
is colinear
with
p
1
p
2
, but it is not betweenp
1
andp
2
. The segments do not intersect.
each other’s lines, although a boundary case may apply.  If all the relative orienta-
tions are nonzero, no boundary case applies.  All the tests against0in lines 7–13
then fail,  and  S
EGMENTS-INTERSECTreturnsFALSEin line 15.  Figure 33.3(b)
shows this case.
A boundary case occurs if any relative orientationd
k
is0. Here, we know thatp
k
is colinear with the other segment.  It is directly on the other segment if and only
if it is between the endpoints of the other segment.  The procedure O
N-SEGMENT
returns whetherp
k
is between the endpoints of segmentp
i
p
j
, which will be the
other segment when called in lines 7–13; the procedure assumes thatp
k
is colinear
with segment
p
i
p
j
.  Figures 33.3(c) and (d) show cases with colinear points.  In
Figure 33.3(c),p
3
is onp
1
p
2
,andsoSEGMENTS-INTERSECTreturnsTRUEin
line 12. No endpoints are on other segments in Figure 33.3(d), and so S
EGMENTS-
I
NTERSECTreturnsFALSEin line 15.

1020Chapter 33Computational Geometry
Other applications of cross products
Later sections of this chapter introduce additional uses for cross products.  In Sec-
tion 33.3, we shall need to sort a set of points according to their polar angles with
respect to a given origin.  As Exercise 33.1-3 asks you to show, we can use cross
products to perform the comparisons in the sorting procedure. In Section 33.2, we
shall use red-black trees to maintain the vertical ordering of a set of line segments.
Rather than  keeping  explicit  key values  which we compare to each other  in the
red-black tree code, we shall compute a cross-product to determine which of two
segments that intersect a given vertical line is above the other.
Exercises
33.1-1
Prove that ifp
1
	p
2
is positive, then vectorp
1
is clockwise from vectorp
2
with
respect  to  the  origin.0; 0/and  that  if  this  cross  product  is  negative,  thenp
1
is
counterclockwise fromp
2
.
33.1-2
Professor van Pelt proposes that only thex-dimension needs to be tested in line 1
of O
N-SEGMENT. Show why the professor is wrong.
33.1-3
Thepolar angleof a pointp
1
with respect to an origin pointp
0
is the angle of the
vectorp
1
p
0
in the usual polar coordinate system.  For example, the polar angle
of.3; 5/with respect to.2; 4/is the angle of the vector.1; 1/,whichis45degrees
or=4radians.  The polar angle of.3; 3/with respect to.2; 4/is the angle of the
vector.1;1/,whichis315degrees or7=4radians.  Write pseudocode to sort a
sequencehp
1
;p
2
;:::;p
n
iofnpoints according to their polar angles with respect
to a given origin pointp
0
. Your procedure should takeO.nlgn/time and use cross
products to compare angles.
33.1-4
Show how to determine inO.n
2
lgn/time whether any three points in a set ofn
points are colinear.
33.1-5
Apolygonis a piecewise-linear,  closed curve in the plane.  That is, it is a curve
ending on itself that is formed by a sequence of straight-line segments, called the
sidesof the polygon. A point joining two consecutive sides is avertexof the poly-
gon. If the polygon issimple, as we shall generally assume, it does not cross itself.
The set of points in the plane enclosed by a simple polygon forms theinteriorof

33.2Determining whether any pair of segments intersects1021
the polygon, the set of points on the polygon itself forms itsboundary, and the set
of points surrounding the polygon forms itsexterior.  A simple polygon isconvex
if,  given any two points  on its boundary  or  in its interior,  all  points  on the line
segment drawn between them are contained in the polygon’s boundary or interior.
A vertex of a convex polygon cannot be expressed as a convex combination of any
two distinct points on the boundary or in the interior of the polygon.
Professor Amundsen proposes the following method to determine whether a se-
quencehp
0
;p
1
;:::;p
n1
iofnpoints forms the consecutive vertices of a convex
polygon. Output “yes” if the set
f
†p
i
p
iC1
p
iC2
WiD0; 1; : : : ; n1
g
, where sub-
script addition is performed modulon, does not contain both left turns and right
turns; otherwise, output “no.” Show that although this method runs in linear time,
it does not always produce the correct answer.  Modify the professor’s method so
that it always produces the correct answer in linear time.
33.1-6
Given a pointp
0
D.x
0
;y
0
/,theright horizontal rayfromp
0
is the set of points
f
p
i
D.x
i
;y
i
/Wx
i
x
0
andy
i
Dy
0
g
, that is, it is the set of points due right ofp
0
along withp
0
itself.  Show how to determine whether a given right horizontal ray
fromp
0
intersects a line segmentp
1
p
2
inO.1/time by reducing the problem to
that of determining whether two line segments intersect.
33.1-7
One way to determine whether  a pointp
0
is in the interior  of a simple,  but not
necessarily convex, polygonPis to look at any ray fromp
0
and check that the ray
intersects the boundary ofPan odd number of times but thatp
0
itself is not on
the boundary ofP.  Show how to compute in‚.n/time whether a pointp
0
is in
the interior of ann-vertex polygonP.(Hint:Use Exercise 33.1-6. Make sure your
algorithm is correct when the ray intersects the polygon boundary at a vertex and
when the ray overlaps a side of the polygon.)
33.1-8
Show how to compute the area of ann-vertex simple, but not necessarily convex,
polygon in‚.n/time. (See Exercise 33.1-5 for definitions pertaining to polygons.)
33.2  Determining whether any pair of segments intersects
This section presents an algorithm for determining whether any two line segments
in a set of segments intersect.  The algorithm uses a technique known as “sweep-
ing,” which is common to many computational-geometry algorithms. Moreover, as

1022Chapter 33Computational Geometry
the exercises at the end of this section show, this algorithm, or simple variations of
it, can help solve other computational-geometry problems.
The algorithm runs inO.nlgn/time, wherenis the number of segments we are
given.  It determines only whether or not any intersection exists; it does not print
all the intersections.  (By Exercise 33.2-1, it takes.n
2
/time in the worst case to
findallthe intersections in a set ofnline segments.)
Insweeping,  an imaginary verticalsweep linepasses through the given set of
geometric objects,  usually from left to right.  We treat the spatial dimension that
the  sweep  line  moves  across,  in  this  case  thex-dimension,  as  a  dimension  of
time. Sweeping provides a method for ordering geometric objects, usually by plac-
ing them into a dynamic data structure, and for taking advantage of relationships
among them. The line-segment-intersection algorithm in this section considers all
the line-segment endpoints in left-to-right order and checks for an intersection each
time it encounters an endpoint.
To describe and prove correct our algorithm for determining whether any two
ofnline segments intersect, we shall make two simplifying assumptions. First, we
assume that no input segment is vertical.  Second, we assume that no three input
segments intersect at a single point.  Exercises 33.2-8 and 33.2-9 ask you to show
that the algorithm is robust enough that it needs only a slight modification to work
even  when  these  assumptions  do  not  hold.   Indeed,  removing  such  simplifying
assumptions and dealing with boundary conditions often present the most difficult
challenges  when  programming  computational-geometry  algorithms  and  proving
their correctness.
Ordering segments
Because we assume that there are no vertical segments,  we know that any input
segment intersecting a given vertical sweep line intersects it at a single point. Thus,
we can order the segments that intersect a vertical sweep line according to they-
coordinates of the points of intersection.
To be more precise, consider two segmentss
1
ands
2
. We say that these segments
arecomparableatxif the vertical sweep line withx-coordinatexintersects both of
them. We say thats
1
isaboves
2
atx, writtens
1
<
x
s
2
,ifs
1
ands
2
are comparable
atxand the intersection ofs
1
with the sweep line atxis higher than the intersection
ofs
2
with  the  same  sweep  line,  or  ifs
1
ands
2
intersect  at  the  sweep  line.   In
Figure 33.4(a), for example, we have the relationshipsa<
r
c,a<
t
b,b<
t
c,
a<
t
c,andb<
u
c.Segmentdis not comparable with any other segment.
For any givenx, the relation “<
x
” is a total preorder (see Section B.2) for all
segments that intersect the sweep line atx.  That is, the relation is transitive, and
if  segmentss
1
ands
2
each  intersect  the  sweep  line  atx,  then  eithers
1
<
x
s
2
ors
2
<
x
s
1
, or both (ifs
1
ands
2
intersect at the sweep line).  (The relation<
x
is

33.2Determining whether any pair of segments intersects1023
rt u
a
c
b
d
(a)
(b)
vw
e
f
g
h
i
z
Figure 33.4The ordering among line segments at various vertical sweep lines.(a)We havea<
r
c,
a<
t
b,b<
t
c,a<
t
c,andb<
u
c.Segmentdis comparable with no other segment shown.
(b)When segmentseandfintersect, they reverse their orders: we havee<

fbutf<
w
e.Any
sweep line (such as ́) that passes through the shaded region haseandfconsecutive in the ordering
given by the relation<
 ́
.
also reflexive, but neither symmetric nor antisymmetric.)  The total preorder may
differ for differing values ofx, however, as segments enter and leave the ordering.
A segment enters the ordering when its left endpoint is encountered by the sweep,
and it leaves the ordering when its right endpoint is encountered.
What happens when the sweep line passes through the intersection of two seg-
ments?  As Figure 33.4(b) shows, the segments reverse their positions in the total
preorder.  Sweep linesandware to the left and right, respectively, of the point
of intersection  of segmentseandf,  and we havee<

fandf<
w
e.Note
that because we assume that no three segments intersect at the same point, there
must be some vertical sweep linexfor which intersecting segmentseandfare
consecutivein the total preorder<
x
. Any sweep line that passes through the shaded
region of Figure 33.4(b), such as ́,haseandfconsecutive in its total preorder.
Moving the sweep line
Sweeping algorithms typically manage two sets of data:
1.  Thesweep-line statusgives the relationships among the objects that the sweep
line intersects.
2.  Theevent-point scheduleis a sequence of points,  calledevent points,which
we  order  from  left  to  right  according  to  theirx-coordinates.   As  the  sweep
progresses from left to right, whenever the sweep line reaches thex-coordinate
of an event point, the sweep halts, processes the event point, and then resumes.
Changes to the sweep-line status occur only at event points.
For some algorithms (the algorithm asked for in Exercise 33.2-7, for example),
the event-point schedule develops dynamically as the algorithm progresses. The al-
gorithm at hand, however, determines all the event points before the sweep, based

1024Chapter 33Computational Geometry
solely on simple properties of the input data. In particular, each segment endpoint
is an event point.  We sort the segment endpoints by increasingx-coordinate and
proceed from left to right.  (If two or more endpoints arecovertical, i.e., they have
the samex-coordinate, we break the tie by putting all the covertical left endpoints
before the covertical right endpoints.  Within a set of covertical left endpoints, we
put those with lowery-coordinates first, and we do the same within a set of cover-
tical right endpoints.)  When we encounter a segment’s left endpoint, we insert the
segment into the sweep-line status, and we delete the segment from the sweep-line
status upon encountering its right endpoint.  Whenever two segments first become
consecutive in the total preorder, we check whether they intersect.
The sweep-line status is a total preorderT, for which we require the following
operations:

INSERT.T; s/: insert segmentsintoT.

DELETE.T; s/: delete segmentsfromT.

ABOVE.T; s/: return the segment immediately above segmentsinT.

BELOW.T; s/: return the segment immediately below segmentsinT.
It is possible for segmentss
1
ands
2
to be mutually above each other in the total
preorderT; this situation can occur ifs
1
ands
2
intersect at the sweep line whose
total preorder is given byT.  In this case, the two segments may appear in either
order inT.
If the input containsnsegments, we can perform each of the operations I
NSERT,
D
ELETE,ABOVE,andBELOWinO.lgn/time using red-black trees.  Recall that
the red-black-tree operations in Chapter 13 involve comparing keys.  We can re-
place the key comparisons by comparisons that use cross products to determine the
relative ordering of two segments (see Exercise 33.2-2).
Segment-intersection pseudocode
The following algorithm takes as input a setSofnline segments,  returning the
boolean value
TRUEif any pair of segments inSintersects, andFALSEotherwise.
A red-black tree maintains the total preorderT.

33.2Determining whether any pair of segments intersects1025
ANY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT.S /
1TD;
2sort the endpoints of the segments inSfrom left to right,
breaking ties by putting left endpoints before right endpoints
and breaking further ties by putting points with lower
y-coordinates first
3foreach pointpin the sorted list of endpoints
4ifpis the left endpoint of a segments
5I
NSERT.T; s/
6if(A
BOVE.T; s/exists and intersectss)
or (B
ELOW.T; s/exists and intersectss)
7return
TRUE
8ifpis the right endpoint of a segments
9ifboth A
BOVE.T; s/and BELOW.T; s/exist
and A
BOVE.T; s/intersects BELOW.T; s/
10return
TRUE
11DELETE.T; s/
12return
FALSE
Figure 33.5 illustrates how the algorithm works. Line 1 initializes the total preorder
to be empty. Line 2 determines the event-point schedule by sorting the2nsegment
endpoints from left to right, breaking ties as described above. One way to perform
line 2 is by lexicographically sorting the endpoints on.x;e;y/,wherexandyare
the usual coordinates,eD0for a left endpoint, andeD1for a right endpoint.
Each iteration of theforloop of lines 3–11 processes one event pointp.Ifpis
the left endpoint of a segments, line 5 addssto the total preorder, and lines 6–7
return
TRUEifsintersects either of the segments it is consecutive with in the total
preorder  defined  by  the  sweep  line  passing  throughp.   (A  boundary  condition
occurs ifplies on another segments
0
.  In this case, we require only thatsands
0
be placed consecutively  intoT.)  Ifpis the right endpoint  of a segments,then
we need to deletesfrom the total preorder.  But first, lines 9–10 return
TRUEif
there is an intersection between the segments surroundingsin the total preorder
defined by the sweep line passing throughp.  If these segments do not intersect,
line  11  deletes  segmentsfrom  the  total  preorder.   If  the  segments  surrounding
segmentsintersect, they would have become consecutive after deletingshad the
returnstatement in line 10 not prevented line 11 from executing.  The correctness
argument, which follows, will make it clear why it suffices to check the segments
surroundings.  Finally, if we never find any intersections after having processed
all2nevent points, line 12 returns
FALSE.

1026Chapter 33Computational Geometry
aa
b
a
c
b
d
a
c
b
d
c
b
e
d
c
b
a
b
c
d
e
f
time
Figure 33.5The execution of ANY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT. Each dashed line is the sweep line at
an event point. Except for the rightmost sweep line, the ordering of segment names below each sweep
line corresponds to the total preorderTat the end of theforloop processing the corresponding event
point.  The rightmost sweep line occurs when processing the right endpoint of segmentc; because
segmentsdandbsurroundcand intersect each other, the procedure returns
TRUE.
Correctness
To show that A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTis correct, we will prove that the call
A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT.S /returnsTRUEif and only if there is an intersec-
tion among the segments inS.
It  is  easy  to  see  that  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTreturnsTRUE(on  lines  7
and 10) only if it finds an intersection between two of the input segments.  Hence,
if it returns
TRUE, there is an intersection.
We also need to show the converse:  that if there is an intersection,  then A
NY-
S
EGMENTS-INTERSECTreturnsTRUE.  Let us suppose  that there is at least one
intersection. Letpbe the leftmost intersection point, breaking ties by choosing the
point with the lowesty-coordinate, and letaandbbe the segments that intersect
atp. Since no intersections occur to the left ofp, the order given byTis correct at
all points to the left ofp. Because no three segments intersect at the same point,a
andbbecome consecutive in the total preorder at some sweep line ́.
2
Moreover,
 ́is to the left ofpor goes throughp. Some segment endpointqon sweep line ́
2
If we allow three segments to intersect at the same point, there may be an intervening segmentcthat
intersects bothaandbat pointp.Thatis,wemayhavea<
w
candc<
w
bfor all sweep lineswto
the left ofpfor whicha<
w
b. Exercise 33.2-8 asks you to show that ANY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT
is correct even if three segments do intersect at the same point.

33.2Determining whether any pair of segments intersects1027
is the event point at whichaandbbecome consecutive in the total preorder.  Ifp
is on sweep line ́,thenqDp.Ifpis not on sweep line ́,thenqis to the left
ofp.  In either case,  the order given byTis correct just before encounteringq.
(Here is where we use the lexicographic  order in which the algorithm processes
event points. Becausepis the lowest of the leftmost intersection points, even ifp
is on sweep line ́and some other intersection pointp
0
is on ́, event pointqDp
is processed before the other intersectionp
0
can interfere with the total preorderT.
Moreover, even ifpis the left endpoint of one segment, saya, and the right end-
point of the other segment, sayb, because left endpoint events occur before right
endpoint events, segmentbis inTupon first encountering segmenta.) Either event
pointqis processed by A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTor it is not processed.
Ifqis processed  by  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT,  only two possible  actions
may occur:
1.  Eitheraorbis inserted intoT, and the other segment is above or below it in
the total preorder. Lines 4–7 detect this case.
2.  Segmentsaandbare already inT, and a segment between them in the total
preorder is deleted, makingaandbbecome consecutive. Lines 8–11 detect this
case.
In either case, we find the intersectionpand A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTreturns
TRUE.
If event pointqis not processed by A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT,  the proce-
dure must have returned before processing all event points.  This situation could
have occurred only if  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECThad already found an inter-
section and returned
TRUE.
Thus,  if there  is an intersection,  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTreturnsTRUE.
As we have already seen, if A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTreturnsTRUE, there is
an intersection. Therefore, A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTalways returns a correct
answer.
Running time
If  setScontainsnsegments,  then  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTruns  in  time
O.nlgn/.   Line  1  takesO.1/time.   Line  2  takesO.nlgn/time,  using  merge
sort or heapsort.  Theforloop of lines 3–11 iterates at most once per event point,
andsowith2nevent points, the loop iterates at most2ntimes. Each iteration takes
O.lgn/time, since each red-black-tree operation takesO.lgn/time and, using the
method of Section 33.1, each intersection test takesO.1/time.  The total time is
thusO.nlgn/.

1028Chapter 33Computational Geometry
Exercises
33.2-1
Show that a set ofnline segments may contain‚.n
2
/intersections.
33.2-2
Given two  segmentsaandbthat  are  comparable  atx,  show  how  to  determine
inO.1/time which ofa<
x
borb<
x
aholds.  Assume that neither segment
is  vertical.   (Hint:Ifaandbdo  not  intersect,  you  can  just  use  cross  products.
Ifaandbintersect—which you can of course determine using only cross prod-
ucts—you  can  still  use  only  addition,  subtraction,  and  multiplication,  avoiding
division.   Of course,  in the application  of  the<
x
relation  used  here,  ifaandb
intersect, we can just stop and declare that we have found an intersection.)
33.2-3
Professor  Mason suggests  that we modify  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTso that
instead of returning upon finding an intersection, it prints the segments that inter-
sect and continues on to the next iteration of theforloop.  The professor calls the
resulting  procedure  P
RINT-INTERSECTING-SEGMENTSand claims that it prints
all intersections, from left to right, as they occur in the set of line segments.  Pro-
fessor Dixon disagrees, claiming that Professor Mason’s idea is incorrect.  Which
professor is right?  Will P
RINT-INTERSECTING-SEGMENTSalways find the left-
most intersection first? Will it always find all the intersections?
33.2-4
Give  anO.nlgn/-time  algorithm  to  determine  whether  ann-vertex  polygon  is
simple.
33.2-5
Give anO.nlgn/-time algorithm to determine whether two simple polygons with
a total ofnvertices intersect.
33.2-6
Adiskconsists of a circle plus its interior and is represented by its center point and
radius.  Two disks intersect if they have any point in common.  Give anO.nlgn/-
time algorithm to determine whether any two disks in a set ofnintersect.
33.2-7
Given a set ofnline segments containing a total ofkintersections, show how to
output allkintersections inO..nCk/lgn/time.

33.3Finding the convex hull1029
33.2-8
Argue  that  A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTworks  correctly  even if  three  or  more
segments intersect at the same point.
33.2-9
Show that A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECTworks correctly in the presence of verti-
cal segments if we treat the bottom endpoint of a vertical segment as if it were a
left endpoint and the top endpoint as if it were a right endpoint.  How does your
answer to Exercise 33.2-2 change if we allow vertical segments?
33.3  Finding the convex hull
Theconvex hullof a setQof points, denoted by CH.Q/, is the smallest convex
polygonPfor  which  each  point  inQis  either  on  the  boundary  ofPor  in  its
interior.  (See Exercise 33.1-5 for a precise definition of a convex polygon.)  We
implicitly assume that all points in the setQare unique  and thatQcontains  at
least three points which are not colinear.  Intuitively,  we can think of each point
inQas being a nail sticking out from a board.  The convex hull is then the shape
formed by a tight rubber band that surrounds all the nails. Figure 33.6 shows a set
of points and its convex hull.
In this section,  we shall  present  two algorithms  that compute  the convex hull
of  a  set  ofnpoints.   Both  algorithms  output  the  vertices  of  the  convex  hull  in
counterclockwise order. The first, known as Graham’s scan, runs inO.nlgn/time.
The second, called Jarvis’s march, runs inO.nh/time, wherehis the number of
vertices of the convex hull.  As Figure 33.6 illustrates, every vertex of CH.Q/is a
p
0
p
1
p
2
p
3
p
4
p
5
p
6
p
7
p
8
p
9
p
10
p
11
p
12
Figure 33.6A set of pointsQD
f
p
0
;p
1
;:::;p
12
g
with its convex hull CH.Q/in gray.

1030Chapter 33Computational Geometry
point inQ. Both algorithms exploit this property, deciding which vertices inQto
keep as vertices of the convex hull and which vertices inQto reject.
We can compute convex hulls inO.nlgn/time by any one of several methods.
Both Graham’s scan and Jarvis’s march use a technique called “rotational sweep,”
processing  vertices  in  the  order  of  the  polar  angles  they  form  with  a  reference
vertex. Other methods include the following:

In theincremental method, we first sort the points from left to right, yielding a
sequencehp
1
;p
2
;:::;p
n
i.Attheith stage, we update the convex hull of the
i1leftmost points, CH.
f
p
1
;p
2
;:::;p
i1
g
/, according to theith point from
the left, thus forming CH.
f
p
1
;p
2
;:::;p
i
g
/.  Exercise 33.3-6 asks you how to
implement this method to take a total ofO.nlgn/time.

In thedivide-and-conquer method, we divide the set ofnpoints in‚.n/time
into two subsets, one containing the leftmost
d
n=2
e
points and one containing
the rightmost
b
n=2
c
points, recursively compute the convex hulls of the subsets,
and then, by means of a clever method, combine the hulls inO.n/time.  The
running time is described by the familiar recurrenceT .n/D2T .n=2/CO.n/,
and so the divide-and-conquer method runs inO.nlgn/time.

Theprune-and-search methodis similar to the worst-case linear-time median
algorithm of Section 9.3. With this method, we find the upper portion (or “upper
chain”) of the convex hull by repeatedly throwing out a constant fraction of the
remaining points until only the upper chain of the convex hull remains. We then
do the same for the lower chain.  This method is asymptotically the fastest:  if
the convex hull containshvertices, it runs in onlyO.nlgh/time.
Computing the convex hull of a set of points is an interesting problem in its own
right. Moreover, algorithms for some other computational-geometry problems start
by computing a convex hull. Consider, for example, the two-dimensionalfarthest-
pair problem:  we are  given  a set  ofnpoints  in the  plane  and  wish  to  find the
two points whose distance from each other is maximum.  As Exercise 33.3-3 asks
you to prove, these two points must be vertices of the convex hull.  Although we
won’t prove it here, we can find the farthest pair of vertices of ann-vertex convex
polygon inO.n/time.  Thus, by computing the convex hull of theninput points
inO.nlgn/time and then finding the farthest pair of the resulting convex-polygon
vertices, we can find the farthest pair of points in any set ofnpoints inO.nlgn/
time.
Graham’s scan
Graham’s scansolves the convex-hull problem by maintaining a stackSof can-
didate  points.   It  pushes  each  point  of  the input  setQonto  the  stack  one  time,

33.3Finding the convex hull1031
and it eventually  pops from the stack each point  that is not a vertex of CH.Q/.
When the algorithm terminates, stackScontains exactly the vertices of CH.Q/,in
counterclockwise order of their appearance on the boundary.
The procedure G
RAHAM-SCANtakes as input a setQof points, where
j
Q
j
3.
It calls the functions  T
OP.S /, which returns the point on top of stackSwithout
changingS,andN
EXT-TO-TOP.S /, which returns the point one entry below the
top of stackSwithout changingS.  As we shall prove in a moment, the stackS
returned  by  G
RAHAM-SCANcontains,  from  bottom  to  top,  exactly  the  vertices
of CH.Q/in counterclockwise order.
G
RAHAM-SCAN.Q/
1letp
0
be the point inQwith the minimumy-coordinate,
or the leftmost such point in case of a tie
2lethp
1
;p
2
;:::;p
m
ibe the remaining points inQ,
sorted by polar angle in counterclockwise order aroundp
0
(if more than one point has the same angle, remove all but
the one that is farthest fromp
0
)
3letSbe an empty stack
4P
USH.p
0
;S/
5P
USH.p
1
;S/
6P
USH.p
2
;S/
7foriD3tom
8whilethe angle formed by points N
EXT-TO-TOP.S /,TOP.S /,
andp
i
makes a nonleft turn
9P
OP.S /
10P
USH.p
i
;S/
11returnS
Figure 33.7 illustrates the progress of G
RAHAM-SCAN.  Line 1 chooses pointp
0
as the point with the lowesty-coordinate, picking the leftmost such point in case
of a tie.  Since there is no point inQthat is belowp
0
and any other points with
the  samey-coordinate  are  to  its  right,p
0
mustbeavertexofCH.Q/.Line2
sorts  the  remaining  points  ofQby  polar  angle  relative  top
0
,  using  the  same
method—comparing cross products—as in Exercise 33.1-3. If two or more points
have the same polar angle relative top
0
, all but the farthest such point are convex
combinations ofp
0
and the farthest point, and so we remove them entirely from
consideration.  We letmdenote the number of points other thanp
0
that remain.
The polar angle, measured in radians, of each point inQrelative top
0
is in the
half-open  intervalŒ0; /.   Since  the  points  are  sorted  according  to  polar  angles,
they are sorted in counterclockwise order relative top
0
.  We designate this sorted
sequence of points byhp
1
;p
2
;:::;p
m
i.  Note that pointsp
1
andp
m
are vertices

1032Chapter 33Computational Geometry
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(a)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(b)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(c)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(d)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(e)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(f)
Figure 33.7The execution of GRAHAM-SCANon the setQof Figure 33.6.  The current convex
hull contained in stackSis shown in gray at each step.(a)The sequencehp
1
;p
2
;:::;p
12
iof points
numbered in order of increasing polar angle relative top
0
, and the initial stackScontainingp
0
,p
1
,
andp
2
.(b)–(k)StackSafter each iteration of theforloop of lines 7–10. Dashed lines show nonleft
turns,  which cause points to be popped from the stack.  In part (h), for example,  the right turn at
angle†p
7
p
8
p
9
causesp
8
to be popped, and then the right turn at angle†p
6
p
7
p
9
causesp
7
to be
popped.

33.3Finding the convex hull1033
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(g)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(h)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(i)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(j)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(k)
p
12
p
11
p
10
p
9
p
8
p
7
p
6
p
5
p
4
p
3
p
2
p
1
p
0
(l)
p
4
p
4
p
5
p
7
Figure 33.7, continued  (l)The  convex  hull  returned  by  the  procedure,  which  matches  that  of
Figure 33.6.

1034Chapter 33Computational Geometry
of CH.Q/(see Exercise 33.3-1).  Figure 33.7(a) shows the points of Figure 33.6
sequentially numbered in order of increasing polar angle relative top
0
.
The remainder of the procedure uses the stackS.  Lines 3–6 initialize the stack
to contain, from bottom to top, the first three pointsp
0
,p
1
,andp
2
. Figure 33.7(a)
shows the initial stackS.Theforloop of lines 7–10 iterates once for each point
in the subsequencehp
3
;p
4
;:::;p
m
i.  We shall see that after processing pointp
i
,
stackScontains, from bottom to top, the vertices of CH.
f
p
0
;p
1
;:::;p
i
g
/in coun-
terclockwise order.  Thewhileloop of lines 8–9 removes points from the stack if
we find them not to be vertices of the convex hull.  When we traverse the convex
hull counterclockwise, we should make a left turn at each vertex.  Thus, each time
thewhileloop finds a vertex at which we make a nonleft turn, we pop the vertex
from the stack.  (By checking for a nonleft turn, rather than just a right turn, this
test precludes the possibility of a straight angle at a vertex of the resulting convex
hull.  We want no straight angles, since no vertex of a convex polygon may be a
convex combination of other vertices of the polygon.)  After we pop all vertices
that have nonleft turns when heading toward pointp
i
, we pushp
i
onto the stack.
Figures  33.7(b)–(k)  show the state  of the stackSafter each iteration  of thefor
loop. Finally, G
RAHAM-SCANreturns the stackSin line 11. Figure 33.7(l) shows
the corresponding convex hull.
The following theorem formally proves the correctness of G
RAHAM-SCAN.
Theorem 33.1 (Correctness of Graham’s scan)
If G
RAHAM-SCANexecutes on a setQof points, where
j
Q
j
3, then at termina-
tion, the stackSconsists of, from bottom to top, exactly the vertices of CH.Q/in
counterclockwise order.
ProofAfter  line  2,  we have  the  sequence  of  pointshp
1
;p
2
; :::; p
m
i.Letus
define,  foriD2;3;:::;m,  the  subset  of  pointsQ
i
D
f
p
0
;p
1
;:::;p
i
g
.The
points inQQ
m
are those that were removed because they had the same polar
angle  relative  top
0
as  some  point  inQ
m
;  these  points  are  not  in  CH.Q/,and
so  CH.Q
m
/DCH.Q/.   Thus,  it  suffices  to  show  that  when  GRAHAM-SCAN
terminates,  the stackSconsists  of the vertices  of CH.Q
m
/in counterclockwise
order, when listed from bottom to top. Note that just asp
0
,p
1
,andp
m
are vertices
of CH.Q/, the pointsp
0
,p
1
,andp
i
are all vertices of CH.Q
i
/.
The proof uses the following loop invariant:
At the start of each iteration of theforloop of lines 7–10, stackSconsists of,
from bottom to top, exactly the vertices of CH.Q
i1
/in counterclockwise
order.
Initialization:The invariant  holds the first time we execute line 7, since at that
time, stackSconsists of exactly the vertices ofQ
2
DQ
i1
, and this set of three

33.3Finding the convex hull1035
p
0
p
1
p
2
p
k
p
j
p
i
Q
j
(a)
p
0
p
1
p
j
p
i
(b)
p
t
p
r
Figure 33.8The proof of correctness of GRAHAM-SCAN.(a)Becausep
i
’s polar angle relative
top
0
is greater thanp
j
’s polar angle, and because the angle†p
k
p
j
p
i
makes a left turn, addingp
i
to CH.Q
j
/gives exactly the vertices of CH.Q
j
[
f
p
i
g
/.(b)If the angle†p
r
p
t
p
i
makes a nonleft
turn, thenp
t
is either in the interior of the triangle formed byp
0
,p
r
,andp
i
or on a side of the
triangle, which means that it cannot be a vertex of CH.Q
i
/.
vertices forms its own convex hull. Moreover, they appear in counterclockwise
order from bottom to top.
Maintenance:Entering  an  iteration  of  theforloop,  the  top  point  on  stackS
isp
i1
, which was pushed at the end of the previous iteration (or before the
first iteration, wheniD3).  Letp
j
be the top point onSafter executing the
while loop of lines 8–9 but before line 10 pushesp
i
,andletp
k
be the point
just belowp
j
onS.  At the moment thatp
j
is the top point onSand we have
not yet pushedp
i
, stackScontains exactly the same points it contained after
iterationjof theforloop.  By the loop invariant, therefore,Scontains exactly
the vertices of CH.Q
j
/at that moment, and they appear in counterclockwise
order from bottom to top.
Let  us  continue  to  focus  on  this  moment  just  before  pushingp
i
.   We  know
thatp
i
’s  polar  angle  relative  top
0
is  greater  thanp
j
’s  polar  angle  and  that
the angle†p
k
p
j
p
i
makes a left turn (otherwise we would have poppedp
j
).
Therefore,  becauseScontains  exactly  the vertices  of CH.Q
j
/,  we see from
Figure 33.8(a) that once we pushp
i
, stackSwill contain exactly the vertices
of CH.Q
j
[
f
p
i
g
/, still in counterclockwise order from bottom to top.
We now show that CH.Q
j
[
f
p
i
g
/is the same set of points as CH.Q
i
/. Consider
any pointp
t
that was popped during iterationiof theforloop, and letp
r
be
the point just belowp
t
on stackSat the timep
t
was popped (p
r
might bep
j
).
The angle†p
r
p
t
p
i
makes a nonleft  turn,  and the polar  angle ofp
t
relative
top
0
is greater than the polar angle ofp
r
.  As Figure 33.8(b) shows,p
t
must

1036Chapter 33Computational Geometry
be either in the interior of the triangle formed byp
0
,p
r
,andp
i
or on a side of
this triangle (but it is not a vertex of the triangle).  Clearly, sincep
t
is within a
triangle formed by three other points ofQ
i
, it cannot be a vertex of CH.Q
i
/.
Sincep
t
is not a vertex of CH.Q
i
/,wehavethat
CH.Q
i

f
p
t
g
/DCH.Q
i
/:(33.1)
LetP
i
be the set of points that were popped during iterationiof theforloop.
Since the equality (33.1) applies for all points inP
i
, we can apply it repeatedly
to show that CH.Q
i
P
i
/DCH.Q
i
/.ButQ
i
P
i
DQ
j
[
f
p
i
g
,andsowe
conclude that CH.Q
j
[
f
p
i
g
/DCH.Q
i
P
i
/DCH.Q
i
/.
We have  shown  that  once  we pushp
i
,  stackScontains  exactly  the  vertices
of CH.Q
i
/in counterclockwise order from bottom to top.  Incrementingiwill
then cause the loop invariant to hold for the next iteration.
Termination:When the loop terminates,  we haveiDmC1,  and so the loop
invariant implies that stackSconsists of exactly the vertices of CH.Q
m
/,which
is CH.Q/, in counterclockwise order from bottom to top.  This completes the
proof.
We  now  show  that  the  running  time  of  GRAHAM-SCANisO.nlgn/,where
nD
j
Q
j
.  Line 1 takes‚.n/time.  Line 2 takesO.nlgn/time, using merge sort
or heapsort to sort the polar angles and the cross-product method of Section 33.1
to compare angles.  (We can remove all but the farthest point with the same polar
angle in total ofO.n/time over allnpoints.)  Lines 3–6 takeO.1/time.  Because
mn1,theforloop of lines 7–10 executes at mostn3times.  Since P
USH
takesO.1/time, each iteration takesO.1/time exclusive of the time spent in the
whileloop of lines 8–9, and thus overall theforloop takesO.n/time exclusive of
the nestedwhileloop.
We use aggregate analysis to show that thewhileloop takesO.n/time overall.
ForiD0; 1; : : : ; m, we push each pointp
i
onto stackSexactly once.  As in the
analysis of the M
ULTIPOPprocedure of Section 17.1, we observe that we can pop at
most the number of items that we push. At least three points—p
0
,p
1
,andp
m
—are
never  popped  from  the stack,  so that  in  fact  at  mostm2P
OPoperations  are
performed  in total.   Each iteration  of  thewhileloop  performs  one  P
OP,andso
there are at mostm2iterations of thewhileloop altogether.  Since the test in
line 8 takesO.1/time, each call of P
OPtakesO.1/time, andmn1, the total
time taken by thewhileloop isO.n/. Thus, the running time of G
RAHAM-SCAN
isO.nlgn/.

33.3Finding the convex hull1037
p
4
p
2
p
0
p
1
right chainleft chain
right chainleft chain
p
3
Figure 33.9The operation of Jarvis’s march.  We choose the first vertex as the lowest pointp
0
.
The next vertex,p
1
, has the smallest polar angle of any point with respect top
0
.  Then,p
2
has the
smallest polar angle with respect top
1
. The right chain goes as high as the highest pointp
3
. Then,
we construct the left chain by finding smallest polar angles with respect to the negativex-axis.
Jarvis’s march
Jarvis’s marchcomputes the convex hull of a setQof points by a technique known
aspackage wrapping(orgift wrapping).   The  algorithm  runs  in  timeO.nh/,
wherehis the number of vertices of CH.Q/.Whenhiso.lgn/, Jarvis’s march is
asymptotically faster than Graham’s scan.
Intuitively, Jarvis’s march simulates wrapping a taut piece of paper around the
setQ. We start by taping the end of the paper to the lowest point in the set, that is,
to the same pointp
0
with which we start Graham’s scan.  We know that this point
must be a vertex of the convex hull.  We pull the paper to the right to make it taut,
and then we pull it higher until it touches a point. This point must also be a vertex
of the convex hull. Keeping the paper taut, we continue in this way around the set
of vertices until we come back to our original pointp
0
.
More formally, Jarvis’s march builds a sequenceHDhp
0
;p
1
;:::;p
h1
iof the
vertices of CH.Q/.  We start withp
0
.  As Figure 33.9 shows, the next vertexp
1
in the convex hull has the smallest polar angle with respect top
0
. (In case of ties,
we choose the point farthest fromp
0
.)  Similarly,p
2
has the smallest polar angle

1038Chapter 33Computational Geometry
with respect top
1
, and so on. When we reach the highest vertex, sayp
k
(breaking
ties  by  choosing  the  farthest  such  vertex),  we  have  constructed,  as  Figure  33.9
shows, theright chainof CH.Q/.  To construct theleft chain, we start atp
k
and
choosep
kC1
as the point with the smallest polar angle with respect top
k
,butfrom
the negativex-axis. We continue on, forming the left chain by taking polar angles
from the negativex-axis, until we come back to our original vertexp
0
.
We could implement Jarvis’s march in one conceptual sweep around the convex
hull, that is, without separately constructing the right and left chains.  Such imple-
mentations typically keep track of the angle of the last convex-hull side chosen and
require the sequence of angles of hull sides to be strictly increasing (in the range
of0to2radians). The advantage of constructing separate chains is that we need
not explicitly compute angles;  the techniques of Section 33.1 suffice to compare
angles.
If implemented properly, Jarvis’s march has a running time ofO.nh/. For each
of thehvertices of CH.Q/, we find the vertex with the minimum polar angle. Each
comparison  between polar  angles takesO.1/time,  using the techniques  of Sec-
tion 33.1. As Section 9.1 shows, we can compute the minimum ofnvalues inO.n/
time if each comparison takesO.1/time. Thus, Jarvis’s march takesO.nh/time.
Exercises
33.3-1
Prove that in the procedure G
RAHAM-SCAN, pointsp
1
andp
m
must be vertices
of CH.Q/.
33.3-2
Consider a model of computation that supports addition, comparison, and multipli-
cation and for which there is a lower bound of.nlgn/to sortnnumbers.  Prove
that.nlgn/is a lower bound for computing, in order, the vertices of the convex
hull of a set ofnpoints in such a model.
33.3-3
Given a set of pointsQ, prove that the pair of points farthest from each other must
be vertices of CH.Q/.
33.3-4
For a given polygonPand a pointqon its boundary,  theshadowofqis the set
of pointsrsuch that the segment
qris entirely on the boundary or in the interior
ofP.   As Figure  33.10  illustrates,  a polygonPisstar-shapedif there  exists  a
pointpin the interior ofPthat is in the shadow of every point on the boundary
ofP.  The set of all such pointspis called thekernelofP.  Given ann-vertex,

33.4Finding the closest pair of points1039
p
(a)(b)
q
q′
Figure 33.10The definition of a star-shaped polygon, for use in Exercise 33.3-4.(a)A star-shaped
polygon. The segment from pointpto any pointqon the boundary intersects the boundary only atq.
(b)A non-star-shaped polygon.  The shaded region on the left is the shadow ofq, and the shaded
region on the right is the shadow ofq
0
. Since these regions are disjoint, the kernel is empty.
star-shaped  polygonPspecified by its vertices in counterclockwise  order,  show
how to compute CH.P /inO.n/time.
33.3-5
In theon-line convex-hull problem, we are given the setQofnpoints one point at
a time.  After receiving each point, we compute the convex hull of the points seen
so far.  Obviously, we could run Graham’s scan once for each point, with a total
running time ofO.n
2
lgn/. Show how to solve the on-line convex-hull problem in
a total ofO.n
2
/time.
33.3-6?
Show how to implement  the incremental  method for computing  the convex hull
ofnpoints so that it runs inO.nlgn/time.
33.4  Finding the closest pair of points
We now consider the problem of finding the closest pair of points in a setQof
n2points. “Closest” refers to the usual euclidean distance: the distance between
pointsp
1
D.x
1
;y
1
/andp
2
D.x
2
;y
2
/is
p
.x
1
x
2
/
2
C.y
1
y
2
/
2
. Two points
in setQmay be coincident, in which case the distance between them is zero. This
problem  has applications  in,  for example,  traffic-control  systems.   A system  for
controlling air or sea traffic might need to identify the two closest vehicles in order
to detect potential collisions.
A brute-force closest-pair algorithm simply looks at all the

n
2

D‚.n
2
/pairs
of points.   In this section,  we shall  describe  a divide-and-conquer  algorithm  for

1040Chapter 33Computational Geometry
this problem, whose running time is described by the familiar recurrenceT .n/D
2T .n=2/CO.n/. Thus, this algorithm uses onlyO.nlgn/time.
The divide-and-conquer algorithm
Each recursive  invocation  of the algorithm  takes as input  a subsetPQand
arraysXandY,  each  of  which  contains  all  the  points  of  the  input  subsetP.
The  points  in  arrayXare  sorted  so  that  theirx-coordinates  are  monotonically
increasing. Similarly, arrayYis sorted by monotonically increasingy-coordinate.
Note  that  in  order  to  attain  theO.nlgn/time  bound,  we  cannot  afford  to  sort
in  each  recursive  call;  if  we  did,  the  recurrence  for  the  running  time  would  be
T .n/D2T .n=2/CO.nlgn/, whose solution isT .n/DO.nlg
2
n/.(Usethe
version of the master method given in Exercise 4.6-2.)  We shall see a little later
how to use “presorting” to maintain this sorted property without actually sorting in
each recursive call.
A  given  recursive  invocation  with  inputsP,X,andYfirst  checks  whether
j
P
j
3.  If so, the invocation simply performs the brute-force method described
above:  try  all

jPj
2

pairs  of  points  and  return  the  closest  pair.   If
j
P
j
>3,the
recursive invocation carries out the divide-and-conquer paradigm as follows.
Divide:Find a vertical linelthat bisects the point setPinto two setsP
L
andP
R
such that
j
P
L
j
D
dj
P
j
=2
e
,
j
P
R
j
D
bj
P
j
=2
c
, all points inP
L
are on or to the
left of linel, and all points inP
R
are on or to the right ofl. Divide the arrayX
into arraysX
L
andX
R
, which contain the points ofP
L
andP
R
respectively,
sorted by monotonically increasingx-coordinate. Similarly, divide the arrayY
into arraysY
L
andY
R
,  which contain  the  points  ofP
L
andP
R
respectively,
sorted by monotonically increasingy-coordinate.
Conquer:Having dividedPintoP
L
andP
R
, make two recursive calls, one to find
the closest pair of points inP
L
and the other to find the closest pair of points
inP
R
.  The inputs to the first call are the subsetP
L
and arraysX
L
andY
L
;the
second call receives the inputsP
R
,X
R
,andY
R
.  Let the closest-pair distances
returned forP
L
andP
R
beı
L
andı
R
, respectively, and letıDmin.ı
L
;ı
R
/.
Combine:The closest pair is either the pair with distanceıfound by one of the
recursive calls, or it is a pair of points with one point inP
L
and the other inP
R
.
The algorithm determines whether there is a pair with one point inP
L
and the
other point inP
R
and whose distance is less thanı.  Observe that if a pair of
points has distance less thanı, both points of the pair must be withinıunits
of linel. Thus, as Figure 33.11(a) shows, they both must reside in the2ı-wide
vertical strip centered  at linel.  To find such a pair,  if one exists,  we do the
following:

33.4Finding the closest pair of points1041
1. Create an arrayY
0
, which is the arrayYwith all points not in the2ı-wide
vertical strip removed. The arrayY
0
is sorted byy-coordinate, just asYis.
2. For each pointpin the arrayY
0
, try to find points inY
0
that are withinı
units ofp. As we shall see shortly, only the7points inY
0
that followpneed
be considered.  Compute the distance frompto each of these7points, and
keep track of the closest-pair distanceı
0
found over all pairs of points inY
0
.
3. Ifı
0
<ı, then the vertical strip does indeed contain a closer pair than the
recursive calls found.  Return this pair and its distanceı
0
.  Otherwise, return
the closest pair and its distanceıfound by the recursive calls.
The above description omits some implementation details that are necessary to
achieve theO.nlgn/running time. After proving the correctness of the algorithm,
we shall show how to implement the algorithm to achieve the desired time bound.
Correctness
The correctness of this closest-pair  algorithm is obvious, except for two aspects.
First, by bottoming out the recursion when
j
P
j
3, we ensure that we never try to
solve a subproblem consisting of only one point. The second aspect is that we need
only check the7points following each pointpin arrayY
0
; we shall now prove this
property.
Suppose that at some level of the recursion, the closest pair of points isp
L
2P
L
andp
R
2P
R
.  Thus,  the distanceı
0
betweenp
L
andp
R
is strictly less thanı.
Pointp
L
must be on or to the left of lineland less thanıunits away. Similarly,p
R
is on or  to the right  ofland less thanıunits away.   Moreover,p
L
andp
R
are
withinıunits of each other vertically. Thus, as Figure 33.11(a) shows,p
L
andp
R
are within aı	2ırectangle centered at linel. (There may be other points within
this rectangle as well.)
We next show that at most8points ofPcan reside within thisı	2ırectangle.
Consider theı	ısquare forming the left half of this rectangle.  Since all points
withinP
L
are at leastıunits apart, at most4points can reside within this square;
Figure 33.11(b) shows how.  Similarly, at most4points inP
R
can reside within
theı	ısquare forming the right half of the rectangle. Thus, at most8points ofP
can reside within theı	2ırectangle.  (Note that since points on linelmay be in
eitherP
L
orP
R
,theremaybeupto4points onl. This limit is achieved if there are
two pairs of coincident points such that each pair consists of one point fromP
L
and
one point fromP
R
, one pair is at the intersection ofland the top of the rectangle,
and the other pair is wherelintersects the bottom of the rectangle.)
Having shown that  at most8points ofPcan reside within the rectangle,  we
can easily see why we need to check only the7points following each point in the
arrayY
0
.  Still assuming that the closest pair isp
L
andp
R
, let us assume without

1042Chapter 33Computational Geometry
l
p
L
p
R
P
L
P
R
δ
2δ
(a)
P
R
P
L
(b)
l
coincident points,
  one in P
L
,
  one in P
R
coincident points,
  one in P
L
,
  one in P
R
δδ
δ
Figure 33.11Key concepts in the proof that the closest-pair algorithm needs to check only7points
following each point in the arrayY
0
.(a)Ifp
L
2P
L
andp
R
2P
R
are less thanıunits apart, they
must reside within aı	2ırectangle centered at linel.(b)How4points that are pairwise at leastı
units apart can all reside within aı	ısquare. On the left are4points inP
L
, and on the right are4
points inP
R
.Theı	2ırectangle can contain8points if the points shown on linelare actually
pairs of coincident points with one point inP
L
and one inP
R
.
loss of generality thatp
L
precedesp
R
in arrayY
0
. Then, even ifp
L
occurs as early
as possible inY
0
andp
R
occurs as late as possible,p
R
is in one of the7positions
followingp
L
. Thus, we have shown the correctness of the closest-pair algorithm.
Implementation and running time
As we have noted, our goal is to have the recurrence for the running time beT .n/D
2T .n=2/CO.n/,whereT .n/is the running time for a set ofnpoints.  The main
difficulty  comes  from  ensuring  that  the  arraysX
L
,X
R
,Y
L
,andY
R
,  which  are
passed  to  recursive  calls,  are  sorted  by  the  proper  coordinate  and  also  that  the
arrayY
0
is sorted byy-coordinate.  (Note that if the arrayXthat is received by a
recursive call is already sorted, then we can easily divide setPintoP
L
andP
R
in
linear time.)
The key observation is that in each call, we wish to form a sorted subset of a
sorted array.  For example,  a particular  invocation  receives the subsetPand the
arrayY, sorted byy-coordinate. Having partitionedPintoP
L
andP
R
, it needs to
form the arraysY
L
andY
R
, which are sorted byy-coordinate, in linear time.  We
can view the method as the opposite of the M
ERGEprocedure from merge sort in

33.4Finding the closest pair of points1043
Section 2.3.1: we are splitting a sorted array into two sorted arrays. The following
pseudocode gives the idea.
1letY
L
Œ1::Y:lengthandY
R
Œ1 : : Y:lengthbe new arrays
2Y
L
:lengthDY
R
:lengthD0
3foriD1toY:length
4ifYŒi2P
L
5Y
L
:lengthDY
L
:lengthC1
6Y
L
ŒY
L
:lengthDYŒi
7elseY
R
:lengthDY
R
:lengthC1
8Y
R
ŒY
R
:lengthDYŒi
We simply examine the points in arrayYin order.  If a pointYŒiis inP
L
,we
append it to the end of arrayY
L
; otherwise, we append it to the end of arrayY
R
.
Similar pseudocode works for forming arraysX
L
,X
R
,andY
0
.
The only remaining question is how to get the points sorted in the first place. We
presortthem; that is, we sort them once and for allbeforethe first recursive call.
We pass these sorted arrays into the first recursive call, and from there we whittle
them down through the recursive calls as necessary.  Presorting adds an additional
O.nlgn/term to the running time, but now each step of the recursion takes linear
time exclusive of the recursive calls.  Thus, if we letT .n/be the running time of
each recursive step andT
0
.n/be the running time of the entire algorithm, we get
T
0
.n/DT .n/CO.nlgn/and
T .n/D
(
2T .n=2/CO.n/ifn>3;
O.1/ifn3:
Thus,T .n/DO.nlgn/andT
0
.n/DO.nlgn/.
Exercises
33.4-1
Professor Williams comes up with a scheme that allows the closest-pair algorithm
to check only5points following each point in arrayY
0
. The idea is always to place
points on linelinto setP
L
.  Then, there cannot be pairs of coincident  points on
linelwith one point inP
L
and one inP
R
.  Thus, at most6points can reside in
theı	2ırectangle. What is the flaw in the professor’s scheme?
33.4-2
Show that it actually suffices to check only the points in the5array positions fol-
lowing each point in the arrayY
0
.

1044Chapter 33Computational Geometry
33.4-3
We can define the distance between two points in ways other than euclidean.  In
the  plane,  theL
m
-distancebetween  pointsp
1
andp
2
is  given  by  the  expres-
sion.
j
x
1
x
2
j
m
C
j
y
1
y
2
j
m
/
1=m
.  Euclidean distance, therefore, isL
2
-distance.
Modify the closest-pair algorithm to use theL
1
-distance, which is also known as
theManhattan distance.
33.4-4
Given  two  pointsp
1
andp
2
in  the  plane,  theL
1
-distance  between  them  is
given by max.
j
x
1
x
2
j
;
j
y
1
y
2
j
/.  Modify the closest-pair algorithm to use the
L
1
-distance.
33.4-5
Suppose that.n/of the points given to the closest-pair algorithm are covertical.
Show how to determine the setsP
L
andP
R
and how to determine whether each
point ofYis inP
L
orP
R
so that the running time for the closest-pair algorithm
remainsO.nlgn/.
33.4-6
Suggest a change to the closest-pair algorithm that avoids presorting theYarray
but leaves the running time asO.nlgn/.(Hint:Merge sorted arraysY
L
andY
R
to
form the sorted arrayY.)
Problems
33-1  Convex layers
Given a setQof points in the plane, we define theconvex layersofQinductively.
The first convex layer ofQconsists of those points inQthat are vertices of CH.Q/.
Fori>1,defineQ
i
to consist of the points ofQwith all points in convex layers
1;2;:::;i1removed. Then, theith convex layer ofQis CH.Q
i
/ifQ
i
¤;and
is undefined otherwise.
a.Give anO.n
2
/-time algorithm to find the convex layers of a set ofnpoints.
b.Prove that.nlgn/time is required to compute the convex layers of a set ofn
points with any model of computation that requires.nlgn/time to sortnreal
numbers.

Problems for Chapter 331045
33-2  Maximal layers
LetQbe  a  set  ofnpoints  in  the  plane.   We  say  that  point.x; y/dominates
point.x
0
;y
0
/ifxx
0
andyy
0
.  A point inQthat is dominated by no other
points inQis said to bemaximal. Note thatQmay contain many maximal points,
which can be organized intomaximal layersas follows. The first maximal layerL
1
is the set of maximal points ofQ.Fori>1,theith maximal layerL
i
is the set of
maximal points inQ
S
i1
jD1
L
j
.
Suppose thatQhasknonempty maximal layers, and lety
i
be they-coordinate
of the leftmost point inL
i
foriD1;2;:::;k. For now, assume that no two points
inQhave the samex-ory-coordinate.
a.Show thaty
1
>y
2
>>y
k
.
Consider  a point.x; y/that is to the left of any point inQand  for  whichyis
distinct from they-coordinate of any point inQ.LetQ
0
DQ[
f
.x; y/
g
.
b.Letjbe the minimum index such thaty
j
<y, unlessy<y
k
, in which case
we letjDkC1. Show that the maximal layers ofQ
0
are as follows:

Ifjk, then the maximal layers ofQ
0
are the same as the maximal layers
ofQ, except thatL
j
also includes.x; y/as its new leftmost point.

IfjDkC1, then the firstkmaximal layers ofQ
0
are the same as forQ,but
in addition,Q
0
has a nonempty.kC1/st maximal layer:L
kC1
D
f
.x; y/
g
.
c.Describe anO.nlgn/-time algorithm to compute the maximal layers of a setQ
ofnpoints. (Hint:Move a sweep line from right to left.)
d.Do any difficulties arise if we now allow input points to have the samex-or
y-coordinate? Suggest a way to resolve such problems.
33-3  Ghostbusters and ghosts
A group ofnGhostbusters is battlingnghosts.  Each Ghostbuster carries a proton
pack, which shoots a stream at a ghost, eradicating it.  A stream goes in a straight
line and terminates when it hits the ghost.  The Ghostbusters decide upon the fol-
lowing strategy.  They will pair off with the ghosts, formingnGhostbuster-ghost
pairs,  and then simultaneously  each Ghostbuster  will shoot  a stream  at his cho-
sen ghost.  As we all know, it isverydangerous to let streams cross,  and so the
Ghostbusters must choose pairings for which no streams will cross.
Assume that the position of each Ghostbuster and each ghost is a fixed point in
the plane and that no three positions are colinear.
a.Argue that there exists a line passing through one Ghostbuster and one ghost
such that the number of Ghostbusters on one side of the line equals the number
of ghosts on the same side. Describe how to find such a line inO.nlgn/time.

1046Chapter 33Computational Geometry
b.Give anO.n
2
lgn/-time algorithm to pair Ghostbusters with ghosts in such a
way that no streams cross.
33-4  Picking up sticks
Professor Charon has a set ofnsticks, which are piled up in some configuration.
Each  stick  is  specified  by  its  endpoints,  and  each  endpoint  is  an  ordered  triple
giving its.x;y; ́/coordinates.  No stick is vertical.  He wishes to pick up all the
sticks, one at a time, subject to the condition that he may pick up a stick only if
there is no other stick on top of it.
a.Give a procedure that takes two sticksaandband reports whetherais above,
below, or unrelated tob.
b.Describe an efficient algorithm that determines whether it is possible to pick up
all the sticks, and if so, provides a legal order in which to pick them up.
33-5  Sparse-hulled distributions
Consider the problem of computing the convex hull of a set of points in the plane
that have been drawn according to some known random distribution.  Sometimes,
the number of points,  or size,  of the convex hull ofnpoints drawn from such a
distribution  has  expectationO.n
1
/for  some constant>0.   We call  such  a
distributionsparse-hulled. Sparse-hulled distributions include the following:

Points drawn uniformly from a unit-radius disk.  The convex hull has expected
size‚.n
1=3
/.

Points drawn uniformly from the interior of a convex polygon withksides, for
any constantk. The convex hull has expected size‚.lgn/.

Points drawn according to a two-dimensional normal distribution.  The convex
hull has expected size‚.
p
lgn/.
a.Given two convex polygons withn
1
andn
2
vertices respectively, show how to
compute the convex hull of alln
1
Cn
2
points inO.n
1
Cn
2
/time. (The polygons
may overlap.)
b.Show how to compute the convex hull of a set ofnpoints drawn independently
according  to  a  sparse-hulled  distribution  inO.n/average-case  time.   (Hint:
Recursively find the convex hulls of the firstn=2points and the secondn=2
points, and then combine the results.)

Notes for Chapter 331047
Chapter notes
This chapter  barely  scratches  the  surface  of  computational-geometry  algorithms
and techniques. Books on computational geometry include those by Preparata and
Shamos [282], Edelsbrunner [99], and O’Rourke [269].
Although geometry has been studied since antiquity,  the development of algo-
rithms for geometric problems is relatively new.  Preparata and Shamos note that
the earliest notion of the complexity of a problem was given by E. Lemoine in 1902.
He was studying euclidean constructions—those using a compass and a ruler—and
devised a set of five primitives:  placing one leg of the compass on a given point,
placing one leg of the compass on a given line, drawing a circle, passing the ruler’s
edge through  a given point,  and drawing  a line.   Lemoine was interested  in the
number of primitives needed to effect a given construction; he called this amount
the “simplicity” of the construction.
The algorithm of Section 33.2, which determines whether any segments inter-
sect, is due to Shamos and Hoey [313].
The original version of Graham’s scan is given by Graham [150]. The package-
wrapping algorithm is due to Jarvis [189].  Using a decision-tree  model of com-
putation, Yao [359] proved a worst-case lower bound of.nlgn/for the running
time of any convex-hull  algorithm.   When  the number of verticeshof  the con-
vex hull is taken into account, the prune-and-search algorithm of Kirkpatrick and
Seidel [206], which takesO.nlgh/time, is asymptotically optimal.
TheO.nlgn/-time divide-and-conquer algorithm for finding the closest pair of
points is by Shamos and appears in Preparata and Shamos [282].  Preparata and
Shamos also show that the algorithm is asymptotically optimal in a decision-tree
model.

34NP-Completeness
Almost all the algorithms we have studied thus far have beenpolynomial-time al-
gorithms: on inputs of sizen, their worst-case running time isO.n
k
/for some con-
stantk. You might wonder whetherallproblems can be solved in polynomial time.
The answer is no. For example, there are problems, such as Turing’s famous “Halt-
ing Problem,” that cannot be solved by any computer, no matter how much time we
allow.  There are also problems that can be solved, but not in timeO.n
k
/for any
constantk.  Generally, we think of problems that are solvable by polynomial-time
algorithms as being tractable, or easy, and problems that require superpolynomial
time as being intractable, or hard.
The subject of this chapter, however, is an interesting class of problems, called
the “NP-complete” problems,  whose status is unknown.  No polynomial-time al-
gorithm has yet been discovered for an NP-complete problem, nor has anyone yet
been able to prove that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist for any one of them.
This so-called P¤NP question has been one of the deepest, most perplexing open
research problems in theoretical computer science since it was first posed in 1971.
Several  NP-complete  problems  are  particularly  tantalizing  because  they seem
on the surface to be similar to problems that we know how to solve in polynomial
time.  In each of the following pairs of problems,  one is solvable in polynomial
time and the other is NP-complete, but the difference between problems appears to
be slight:
Shortest vs. longest simple paths:In Chapter 24, we saw that even with negative
edge  weights,  we  can  findshortestpaths  from  a  single  source  in  a  directed
graphGD.V; E/inO.VE/time. Finding alongestsimple path between two
vertices is difficult, however.  Merely determining whether a graph contains a
simple path with at least a given number of edges is NP-complete.
Euler tour vs. hamiltonian cycle:AnEuler tourof a connected, directed graph
GD.V; E/is a cycle that traverses eachedgeofGexactly once,  although
it is allowed to visit each vertex more than once.   By Problem 22-3,  we can
determine whether a graph has an Euler tour in onlyO.E/time and, in fact,

Chapter 34NP-Completeness1049
we can find the edges of the Euler tour inO.E/time.  Ahamiltonian cycleof
a directed graphGD.V; E/is a simple cycle that contains eachvertexinV.
Determining whether a directed graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.
(Later in this chapter,  we shall prove that determining whether anundirected
graph has a hamiltonian cycle is NP-complete.)
2-CNF satisfiability vs. 3-CNF satisfiability:A  boolean  formula  contains  vari-
ableswhosevaluesare0or1; boolean connectives such as^(AND),_(OR),
and:(NOT); and parentheses.  A boolean formula issatisfiableif there exists
some assignment of the values0and1to its variables that causes it to evaluate
to1. We shall define terms more formally later in this chapter, but informally, a
boolean formula is ink-conjunctive normal form,ork-CNF, if it is the AND
of clauses of ORs of exactlykvariables or their negations.  For example, the
boolean formula.x
1
_:x
2
/^.:x
1
_x
3
/^.:x
2
_:x
3
/is in 2-CNF. (It has
the satisfying assignmentx
1
D1; x
2
D0; x
3
D1.)  Although we can deter-
mine in polynomial time whether a 2-CNF formula is satisfiable, we shall see
later in this chapter that determining whether a 3-CNF formula is satisfiable is
NP-complete.
NP-completeness and the classes P and NP
Throughout this chapter,  we shall refer to three classes of problems:  P, NP, and
NPC, the latter class being the NP-complete problems.  We describe them infor-
mally here, and we shall define them more formally later on.
The  class  P  consists  of  those  problems  that  are  solvable  in  polynomial  time.
More specifically,  they are problems that can be solved in timeO.n
k
/for some
constantk,wherenis the size of the input to the problem.  Most of the problems
examined in previous chapters are in P.
The class NP consists of those problems that are “verifiable” in polynomial time.
What do we mean by a problem being verifiable?  If we were somehow given a
“certificate” of a solution, then we could verify that the certificate is correct in time
polynomial in the size of the input to the problem. For example, in the hamiltonian-
cycle problem,  given a directed graphGD.V; E/,  a certificate would be a se-
quenceh
1
;
2
;
3
;:::;
jVj
iof
j
V
j
vertices.  We could easily check in polynomial
time that.
i
;
iC1
/2EforiD1; 2; 3; : : : ;
j
V
j
1and that.
jVj
;
1
/2Eas well.
As another example, for 3-CNF satisfiability, a certificate would be an assignment
of values to variables.   We could check in polynomial  time that this assignment
satisfies the boolean formula.
Any problem in P is also in NP, since if a problem is in P then we can solve it
in polynomial time without even being supplied a certificate.  We shall formalize
this notion later in this chapter, but for now we can believe that PNP. The open
question is whether or not P is a proper subset of NP.

1050Chapter 34NP-Completeness
Informally,  a  problem  is  in  the  class  NPC—and  we  refer  to  it  as  beingNP-
complete—if it is in NP and is as “hard” as any problem in NP. We shall formally
define  what  it  means  to  be  as  hard  as  any  problem  in  NP  later  in  this  chapter.
In  the  meantime,  we  will  state  without  proof  that  ifanyNP-complete  problem
can be solved in polynomial  time,  theneveryproblem  in NP has a polynomial-
time algorithm. Most theoretical computer scientists believe that the NP-complete
problems  are  intractable,  since  given  the  wide  range  of  NP-complete  problems
that have been studied to date—without anyone having discovered a polynomial-
time solution  to any of them—it would be truly astounding  if all of them could
be solved  in polynomial  time.   Yet,  given the effort  devoted  thus far  to proving
that  NP-complete  problems  are intractable—without  a conclusive  outcome—we
cannot rule out the possibility that the NP-complete problems are in fact solvable
in polynomial time.
To become a good algorithm designer, you must understand the rudiments of the
theory of NP-completeness.  If you can establish a problem as NP-complete, you
provide good evidence  for its intractability.   As an engineer,  you would then do
better to spend your time developing an approximation algorithm (see Chapter 35)
or solving a tractable special case, rather than searching for a fast algorithm that
solves the problem exactly.  Moreover, many natural and interesting problems that
on the surface seem no harder than sorting, graph searching, or network flow are
in fact NP-complete.  Therefore, you should become familiar with this remarkable
class of problems.
Overview of showing problems to be NP-complete
The techniques  we use  to show  that a particular  problem  is NP-complete  differ
fundamentally  from the techniques  used throughout  most of this book to design
and  analyze  algorithms.   When we demonstrate  that  a problem  is NP-complete,
we are making a statement about how hard it is (or at least how hard we think it
is), rather than about how easy it is.  We are not trying to prove the existence of
an efficient algorithm, but instead that no efficient algorithm is likely to exist.  In
this way, NP-completeness proofs bear some similarity to the proof in Section 8.1
of an.nlgn/-time lower bound for any comparison sort algorithm; the specific
techniques used for showing NP-completeness differ from the decision-tree method
used in Section 8.1, however.
We rely on three key concepts in showing a problem to be NP-complete:
Decision problems vs. optimization problems
Many problems of interest areoptimization problems, in which each feasible (i.e.,
“legal”) solution has an associated value, and we wish to find a feasible solution
with the best value.  For example, in a problem that we call SHORTEST-PATH,

Chapter 34NP-Completeness1051
we are given an undirected graphGand verticesuand, and we wish to find a
path fromutothat uses the fewest edges.  In other words, SHORTEST-PATH
is the single-pair shortest-path problem in an unweighted, undirected graph.  NP-
completeness applies directly not to optimization problems, however, but todeci-
sion problems, in which the answer is simply “yes” or “no” (or, more formally, “1”
or “0”).
Although NP-complete problems are confined to the realm of decision problems,
we can take advantage of a convenient relationship between optimization problems
and decision problems.  We usually can cast a given optimization problem as a re-
lated decision  problem  by imposing a bound  on the value to be optimized.   For
example, a decision problem related to SHORTEST-PATH is PATH:  given a di-
rected graphG, verticesuand, and an integerk, does a path exist fromuto
consisting of at mostkedges?
The relationship between an optimization problem and its related decision prob-
lem  works  in  our  favor  when  we  try  to  show  that  the  optimization  problem  is
“hard.”  That is because the decision problem is in a sense “easier,” or at least “no
harder.” As a specific example, we can solve PATH by solving SHORTEST-PATH
and then comparing the number of edges in the shortest path found to the value
of  the  decision-problem  parameterk.   In  other  words,  if  an  optimization  prob-
lem is easy, its related decision problem is easy as well.  Stated in a way that has
more relevance  to NP-completeness,  if we can provide  evidence  that a decision
problem is hard, we also provide evidence that its related optimization problem is
hard.  Thus, even though it restricts attention to decision problems, the theory of
NP-completeness often has implications for optimization problems as well.
Reductions
The above notion of showing that one problem is no harder or no easier than an-
other applies even when both problems are decision problems. We take advantage
of this idea in almost every NP-completeness proof, as follows.  Let us consider a
decision problemA, which we would like to solve in polynomial time. We call the
input to a particular problem aninstanceof that problem; for example, in PATH,
an instance would be a particular graphG, particular verticesuandofG,anda
particular integerk.  Now suppose that we already know how to solve a different
decision problemBin polynomial time. Finally, suppose that we have a procedure
that transforms any instance ̨ofAinto some instanceˇofBwith the following
characteristics:

The transformation takes polynomial time.

The answers are the same.  That is, the answer for ̨is “yes” if and only if the
answer forˇis also “yes.”

1052Chapter 34NP-Completeness
polynomial-time
reduction algorithm
instanceβ
polynomial-time
algorithm to decide B
yes
yes
polynomial-time algorithm to decide A
no
no
ofB
instance
α
ofA
Figure 34.1How to use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm to solve a decision problemAin
polynomial time, given a polynomial-time decision algorithm for another problemB. In polynomial
time, we transform an instance ̨ofAinto an instanceˇofB,wesolveBin polynomial time, and
we use the answer forˇas the answer for ̨.
We  call  such  a  procedure  a  polynomial-timereduction algorithmand,  as  Fig-
ure 34.1 shows, it provides us a way to solve problemAin polynomial time:
1.   Given an instance ̨of problemA, use a polynomial-time reduction algorithm
to transform it to an instanceˇof problemB.
2.   Run the polynomial-time decision algorithm forBon the instanceˇ.
3.   Use the answer forˇas the answer for ̨.
As long as each of these steps takes polynomial time, all three together do also, and
so we have a way to decide on ̨in polynomial time. In other words, by “reducing”
solving problemAto solving problemB, we use the “easiness” ofBto prove the
“easiness” ofA.
Recalling that NP-completeness is about showing how hard a problem is rather
than how easy it is, we use polynomial-time reductions in the opposite way to show
that a problem is NP-complete. Let us take the idea a step further, and show how we
could use polynomial-time reductions to show that no polynomial-time algorithm
can exist for a particular problemB.  Suppose we have a decision problemAfor
which we already know that no polynomial-time algorithm can exist.  (Let us not
concern ourselves for now with how to find such a problemA.)  Suppose further
that we have a polynomial-time reduction transforming instances ofAto instances
ofB. Now we can use a simple proof by contradiction to show that no polynomial-
time  algorithm  can  exist  forB.   Suppose  otherwise;  i.e.,  suppose  thatBhas  a
polynomial-time  algorithm.   Then,  using  the  method  shown  in  Figure  34.1,  we
would have a way to solve problemAin polynomial time, which contradicts our
assumption that there is no polynomial-time algorithm forA.
For NP-completeness, we cannot assume that there is absolutely no polynomial-
time algorithm for problemA. The proof methodology is similar, however, in that
we prove that problemBis NP-complete on the assumption that problemAis also
NP-complete.

34.1Polynomial time1053
A first NP-complete problem
Because the technique of reduction relies on having a problem already known to
be  NP-complete  in  order  to  prove  a different  problem  NP-complete,  we need  a
“first” NP-complete problem. The problem we shall use is the circuit-satisfiability
problem, in which we are given a boolean combinational circuit composed of AND,
OR, and NOT gates, and we wish to know whether there exists some set of boolean
inputs to this circuit that causes its output to be1.  We shall prove that this first
problem is NP-complete in Section 34.3.
Chapter outline
This chapter studies the aspects of NP-completeness that bear most directly on the
analysis of algorithms. In Section 34.1, we formalize our notion of “problem” and
define the complexity class P of polynomial-time solvable decision problems.  We
also see how these notions fit into the framework of formal-language theory.  Sec-
tion 34.2 defines the class NP of decision problems whose solutions are verifiable
in polynomial time. It also formally poses the P¤NP question.
Section 34.3 shows we can relate problems via polynomial-time  “reductions.”
It defines NP-completeness and sketches a proof that one problem, called “circuit
satisfiability,” is NP-complete. Having found one NP-complete problem, we show
in Section 34.4 how to prove other problems to be NP-complete much more simply
by the methodology of reductions. We illustrate this methodology by showing that
two formula-satisfiability problems are NP-complete.  With additional reductions,
we show in Section 34.5 a variety of other problems to be NP-complete.
34.1  Polynomial time
We begin our study of NP-completeness by formalizing our notion of polynomial-
time solvable problems.  We generally regard these problems as tractable, but for
philosophical,  not  mathematical,  reasons.   We  can  offer  three  supporting  argu-
ments.
First, although we may reasonably regard a problem that requires time‚.n
100
/
to be intractable, very few practical problems require time on the order of such a
high-degree polynomial.  The polynomial-time computable problems encountered
in practice typically require much less time.  Experience has shown that once the
first polynomial-time algorithm for a problem has been discovered, more efficient
algorithms  often follow.   Even if the current  best  algorithm  for a problem  has a
running time of‚.n
100
/, an algorithm with a much better running time will likely
soon be discovered.

1054Chapter 34NP-Completeness
Second,  for  many  reasonable  models  of  computation,  a  problem  that  can  be
solved in polynomial time in one model can be solved in polynomial time in an-
other. For example, the class of problems solvable in polynomial time by the serial
random-access machine used throughout most of this book is the same as the class
of problems solvable in polynomial time on abstract Turing machines.
1
It is also
the same as the class of problems solvable in polynomial time on a parallel com-
puter when the number of processors grows polynomially with the input size.
Third, the class of polynomial-time solvable problems has nice closure proper-
ties, since polynomials are closed under addition, multiplication, and composition.
For example, if the output of one polynomial-time algorithm is fed into the input of
another, the composite algorithm is polynomial. Exercise 34.1-5 asks you to show
that if an algorithm makes a constant number of calls to polynomial-time subrou-
tines and performs an additional amount of work that also takes polynomial time,
then the running time of the composite algorithm is polynomial.
Abstract problems
To understand the class of polynomial-time solvable problems, we must first have
a formal notion of what a “problem” is.  We define anabstract problemQto be a
binary relation on a setIof probleminstancesand a setSof problemsolutions.
For example,  an instancefor SHORTEST-PATH is a triple consisting of a graph
and two vertices.  A solution is a sequence of vertices in the graph, with perhaps
the empty sequence denoting that no path exists. The problem SHORTEST-PATH
itself is the relation that associates each instance of a graph and two vertices with
a shortest path in the graph that connects the two vertices. Since shortest paths are
not necessarily unique, a given problem instance may have more than one solution.
This formulation of an abstract problem is more general than we need for our
purposes.  As we saw above, the theory of NP-completeness restricts attention to
decision problems:  those having a yes/no solution.  In this case, we can view an
abstract decision problem as a function that maps the instance setIto the solution
set
f
0; 1
g
.  For example,  a decision  problem related to SHORTEST-PATH is the
problem PATH that we saw earlier. IfiDhG; u; ; kiis an instance of the decision
problem  PATH,  then  PATH.i /D1(yes)  if  a  shortest  path  fromutohas  at
mostkedges, and PATH.i /D0(no) otherwise.  Many abstract problems are not
decision problems, but ratheroptimization problems, which require some value to
be minimized or maximized. As we saw above, however, we can usually recast an
optimization problem as a decision problem that is no harder.
1
See Hopcroft and Ullman [180] or Lewis and Papadimitriou [236] for a thorough treatment of the
Turing-machine model.

34.1Polynomial time1055
Encodings
In order for a computer program to solve an abstract problem, we must represent
problem instances in a way that the program understands.  Anencodingof a setS
of abstract objects is a mappingefromSto the set of binary strings.
2
For example,
we are all familiar with encoding the natural numbersND
f
0; 1; 2; 3; 4; : : :
g
as
the strings
f
0; 1; 10; 11; 100; : : :
g
.  Using this encoding,e.17/D10001.   If you
have looked at computer representations of keyboard characters, you probably have
seen the ASCII code, where, for example, the encoding ofAis1000001.  We can
encode a compound object as a binary string by combining the representations of
its constituent parts. Polygons, graphs, functions, ordered pairs, programs—all can
be encoded as binary strings.
Thus, a computer algorithm that “solves” some abstract decision problem actu-
ally takes an encoding of a problem instance as input.  We call a problem whose
instance set is the set of binary strings aconcrete problem.  We say that an algo-
rithmsolvesa concrete problem in timeO.T .n//if, when it is provided a problem
instanceiof lengthnD
j
i
j
, the algorithm can produce the solution inO.T .n//
time.
3
A concrete problem ispolynomial-time solvable, therefore, if there exists
an algorithm to solve it in timeO.n
k
/for some constantk.
We can now formally define thecomplexity classPas the set of concrete deci-
sion problems that are polynomial-time solvable.
We can use encodings to map abstract problems to concrete problems.  Given
an abstract decision problemQmapping an instance setIto
f
0; 1
g
, an encoding
eWI!
f
0; 1
g

can induce a related concrete decision problem, which we denote
bye.Q/.
4
If the solution to an abstract-problem instancei2IisQ.i /2
f
0; 1
g
,
then the solution to the concrete-problem instancee.i/2
f
0; 1
g

is alsoQ.i /.Asa
technicality, some binary strings might represent no meaningful abstract-problem
instance.  For convenience,  we shall assume that any such string maps arbitrarily
to0. Thus, the concrete problem produces the same solutions as the abstract prob-
lem  on  binary-string  instances  that  represent  the  encodings  of  abstract-problem
instances.
We would like to extend the definition of polynomial-time solvability from con-
crete problems to abstract problems by using encodings as the bridge, but we would
2
The codomain ofeneed not bebinarystrings; any set of strings over a finite alphabet having at
least 2 symbols will do.
3
We assume that the algorithm’s output is separate from its input. Because it takes at least one time
step to produce each bit of the output and the algorithm takesO.T .n//time steps, the size of the
output isO.T .n//.
4
We denote by
f
0; 1
g

the set of all strings composed of symbols from the set
f
0; 1
g
.

1056Chapter 34NP-Completeness
like the definition to be independent  of any particular  encoding.  That is, the ef-
ficiency of solving a problem should not depend on how the problem is encoded.
Unfortunately, it depends quite heavily on the encoding. For example, suppose that
an integerkis to be provided as the sole input to an algorithm, and suppose that
the running time of the algorithm is‚.k/. If the integerkis provided inunary—a
string ofk1s—then the running time of the algorithm isO.n/on length-ninputs,
which is polynomial time.  If we use the more natural binary representation of the
integerk, however, then the input length isnD
b
lgk
c
C1.  In this case, the run-
ning time of the algorithm is‚.k/D‚.2
n
/, which is exponential in the size of the
input.  Thus, depending on the encoding, the algorithm runs in either polynomial
or superpolynomial time.
How we encode an abstract problem matters quite a bit to how we understand
polynomial time. We cannot really talk about solving an abstract problem without
first specifying an encoding.  Nevertheless, in practice, if we rule out “expensive”
encodings such as unary ones, the actual encoding of a problem makes little dif-
ference to whether the problem can be solved in polynomial time.  For example,
representing integers in base3instead of binary has no effect on whether a prob-
lem is solvable in polynomial time, since we can convert an integer represented in
base3to an integer represented in base2in polynomial time.
We say that a functionfW
f
0; 1
g

!
f
0; 1
g

ispolynomial-time computable
if there exists a polynomial-time  algorithmAthat,  given any inputx2
f
0; 1
g

,
produces as outputf.x/. For some setIof problem instances, we say that two en-
codingse
1
ande
2
arepolynomially relatedif there exist two polynomial-time com-
putable functionsf
12
andf
21
such that for anyi2I,wehavef
12
.e
1
.i //De
2
.i /
andf
21
.e
2
.i //De
1
.i /.
5
That is, a polynomial-time algorithm can compute the en-
codinge
2
.i /from the encodinge
1
.i /, and vice versa. If two encodingse
1
ande
2
of
an abstract problem are polynomially related, whether the problem is polynomial-
time solvable or not is independent  of which encoding we use,  as the following
lemma shows.
Lemma 34.1
LetQbe an abstract decision problem on an instance setI,andlete
1
ande
2
be
polynomially related encodings onI. Then,e
1
.Q/2P if and only ife
2
.Q/2P.
5
Technically,  we  also require  the  functionsf
12
andf
21
to “map  noninstances  to noninstances.”
Anoninstanceof an encodingeis a stringx2
f
0; 1
g

such that there is no instanceifor which
e.i/Dx. We require thatf
12
.x/Dyfor every noninstancexof encodinge
1
,whereyis some non-
instance ofe
2
,andthatf
21
.x
0
/Dy
0
for every noninstancex
0
ofe
2
,wherey
0
is some noninstance
ofe
1
.

34.1Polynomial time1057
ProofWe need only prove the forward direction, since the backward direction is
symmetric.  Suppose, therefore, thate
1
.Q/can be solved in timeO.n
k
/for some
constantk.  Further, suppose that for any problem instancei, the encodinge
1
.i /
can be computed from the encodinge
2
.i /in timeO.n
c
/for some constantc,where
nD
j
e
2
.i /
j
.  To solve probleme
2
.Q/, on inpute
2
.i /, we first computee
1
.i /and
then run the algorithm fore
1
.Q/one
1
.i /.  How long does this take?  Converting
encodings takes timeO.n
c
/, and therefore
j
e
1
.i /
j
DO.n
c
/, since the output of
a serial  computer  cannot  be  longer  than  its  running  time.   Solving  the  problem
one
1
.i /takes timeO.
j
e
1
.i /
j
k
/DO.n
ck
/, which is polynomial since bothcandk
are constants.
Thus, whether an abstract problem has its instances encoded in binary or base 3
does not affect its “complexity,” that is, whether it is polynomial-time solvable or
not; but if instances are encoded in unary, its complexity may change.  In order to
be able to converse in an encoding-independent fashion, we shall generally assume
that problem instances are encoded in any reasonable, concise fashion, unless we
specifically say otherwise.  To be precise, we shall assume that the encoding of an
integer is polynomially related to its binary representation, and that the encoding of
a finite set is polynomially related to its encoding as a list of its elements, enclosed
in braces and separated by commas.  (ASCII is one such encoding scheme.)  With
such a “standard” encoding in hand, we can derive reasonable encodings of other
mathematical objects, such as tuples, graphs, and formulas. To denote the standard
encoding  of  an  object,  we  shall  enclose  the  object  in  angle  braces.   Thus,hGi
denotes the standard encoding of a graphG.
As long as we implicitly  use an encoding  that  is polynomially  related  to this
standard encoding, we can talk directly about abstract problems without reference
to any particular encoding, knowing that the choice of encoding has no effect on
whether the abstract problem is polynomial-time  solvable.  Henceforth,  we shall
generally assume that all problem instances are binary strings encoded using the
standard encoding, unless we explicitly specify the contrary. We shall also typically
neglect the distinction between abstract and concrete problems. You should watch
out for problems that arise in practice, however, in which a standard encoding is
not obvious and the encoding does make a difference.
A formal-language framework
By focusing  on  decision  problems,  we  can  take  advantage  of  the  machinery  of
formal-language  theory.    Let’s  review  some  definitions  from  that  theory.    An
alphabet†is  a  finite  set  of  symbols.    AlanguageLover†is  any  set  of
strings  made  up  of  symbols  from†.For  example,  if†D
f
0; 1
g
,  the  set
LD
f
10; 11; 101; 111; 1011; 1101; 10001; : : :
g
is the language of binary represen-

1058Chapter 34NP-Completeness
tations of prime numbers.  We denote theempty stringby",theempty language
by;, and the language of all strings over†by†

.  For example, if†D
f
0; 1
g
,
then†

D
f
"; 0; 1; 00; 01; 10; 11; 000; : : :
g
is the set of all binary strings.  Every
languageLover†is a subset of†

.
We can perform a variety of operations on languages.  Set-theoretic operations,
such asunionandintersection, follow directly from the set-theoretic definitions.
We define thecomplementofLby
LD†

L.TheconcatenationL
1
L
2
of two
languagesL
1
andL
2
is the language
LD
f
x
1
x
2
Wx
1
2L
1
andx
2
2L
2
g
:
TheclosureorKleene starof a languageLis the language
L

D
f
"
g
[L[L
2
[L
3
[;
whereL
k
is the language obtained by concatenatingLto itselfktimes.
From the point of view of language theory, the set of instances for any decision
problemQis simply the set†

,where†D
f
0; 1
g
.SinceQis entirely character-
ized by those problem instances that produce a 1 (yes) answer, we can viewQas
a languageLover†D
f
0; 1
g
,where
LD
f
x2†

WQ.x/D1
g
:
For example, the decision problem PATH has the corresponding language
PAT HDfhG; u; ; kiWGD.V; E/is an undirected graph,
u; 2V;
k0is an integer, and
there exists a path fromutoinG
consisting of at mostkedgesg:
(Where convenient, we shall sometimes use the same name—PATH in this case—
to refer to both a decision problem and its corresponding language.)
The formal-language framework allows us to express concisely the relation be-
tween  decision  problems  and  algorithms  that  solve  them.    We  say  that  an  al-
gorithmAacceptsa  stringx2
f
0; 1
g

if,  given  inputx,  the  algorithm’s  out-
putA.x/is1.   The  languageacceptedby  an  algorithmAis  the  set  of  strings
LD
f
x2
f
0; 1
g

WA.x/D1
g
, that is, the set of strings that the algorithm accepts.
An algorithmArejectsa stringxifA.x/D0.
Even if languageLis accepted by an algorithmA, the algorithm will not neces-
sarily reject a stringx62Lprovided as input to it. For example, the algorithm may
loop forever.  A languageLisdecidedby an algorithmAif every binary string
inLis accepted byAand every binary string not inLis rejected byA.Alan-
guageLisaccepted in polynomial timeby an algorithmAif it is accepted byA
and if in addition there exists a constantksuch that for any length-nstringx2L,

34.1Polynomial time1059
algorithmAacceptsxin timeO.n
k
/.   A languageLisdecided in polynomial
timeby an algorithmAif there exists a constantksuch that for any length-nstring
x2
f
0; 1
g

, the algorithm correctly decides whetherx2Lin timeO.n
k
/.  Thus,
to accept a language, an algorithm need only produce an answer when provided a
string inL, but to decide a language, it must correctly accept or reject every string
in
f
0; 1
g

.
As an example, the language PATH can be accepted in polynomial time.  One
polynomial-time accepting algorithm verifies thatGencodes an undirected graph,
verifies thatuandare vertices inG, uses breadth-first search to compute a short-
est path fromutoinG, and then compares the number of edges on the shortest
path obtained withk.IfGencodes an undirected graph and the path found fromu
tohas at mostkedges, the algorithm outputs1and halts.  Otherwise, the algo-
rithm runs forever.  This algorithm does not decide PATH, however, since it does
not explicitly output0for instances in which a shortest path has more thankedges.
A decision algorithm for PATH must explicitly reject binary strings that do not be-
long to PATH. For a decision problem such as PATH, such a decision algorithm is
easy to design: instead of running forever when there is not a path fromutowith
at mostkedges, it outputs0and halts.  (It must also output0and halt if the input
encoding is faulty.)  For other problems, such as Turing’s Halting Problem, there
exists an accepting algorithm, but no decision algorithm exists.
We can informally define acomplexity classas a set of languages, membership
in  which  is  determined  by  acomplexity measure,  such  as  running  time,  of  an
algorithm that determines whether a given stringxbelongs to languageL.The
actual definition of a complexity class is somewhat more technical.
6
Using this language-theoretic framework, we can provide an alternative defini-
tion of the complexity class P:
PDfL
f
0; 1
g

Wthere exists an algorithmAthat decidesL
in polynomial timeg:
In fact, P is also the class of languages that can be accepted in polynomial time.
Theorem 34.2
PD
f
LWLis accepted by a polynomial-time algorithm
g
:
ProofBecause the class of languages decided by polynomial-time algorithms is
a  subset  of  the  class  of  languages  accepted  by  polynomial-time  algorithms,  we
need  only  show  that  ifLis  accepted  by  a  polynomial-time  algorithm,  it  is  de-
cided by a polynomial-time algorithm.  LetLbe the language accepted by some
6
For more on complexity classes, see the seminal paper by Hartmanis and Stearns [162].

1060Chapter 34NP-Completeness
polynomial-time  algorithmA.   We shall  use  a classic  “simulation”  argument  to
construct  another  polynomial-time  algorithmA
0
that  decidesL.   BecauseAac-
ceptsLin timeO.n
k
/for  some constantk,  there  also exists  a constantcsuch
thatAacceptsLin at mostcn
k
steps.  For any input stringx, the algorithmA
0
simulatescn
k
steps ofA. After simulatingcn
k
steps, algorithmA
0
inspects the be-
havior ofA.IfAhas acceptedx,thenA
0
acceptsxby outputting a1.IfAhas not
acceptedx,thenA
0
rejectsxby outputting a0.  The overhead ofA
0
simulatingA
does not increase the running time by more than a polynomial factor, and thusA
0
is a polynomial-time algorithm that decidesL.
Note that the proof of Theorem 34.2 is nonconstructive.  For a given language
L2P, we may not actually know a bound on the running time for the algorithmA
that acceptsL. Nevertheless, we know that such a bound exists, and therefore, that
an algorithmA
0
exists that can check the bound, even though we may not be able
to find the algorithmA
0
easily.
Exercises
34.1-1
Define the optimization problem LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH as the relation that
associates  each instance  of  an undirected  graph  and  two vertices  with the num-
ber  of  edges  in a longest  simple  path  between  the  two vertices.   Define the de-
cision  problem  LONGEST-PATHDfhG; u; ; kiWGD.V; E/is  an  undi-
rected  graph,u; 2V,k0is  an  integer,  and  there  exists  a  simple  path
fromutoinGconsisting of at leastkedgesg. Show that the optimization prob-
lem LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH can be solved in polynomial time if and only if
LONGEST-PATH2P.
34.1-2
Give a formal definition for the problem of finding the longest simple cycle in an
undirected graph. Give a related decision problem. Give the language correspond-
ing to the decision problem.
34.1-3
Give a formal encoding of directed graphs as binary strings using an adjacency-
matrix representation.  Do the same using an adjacency-list representation.  Argue
that the two representations are polynomially related.
34.1-4
Is the dynamic-programming algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem that is asked
for in Exercise 16.2-2 a polynomial-time algorithm? Explain your answer.

34.2Polynomial-time verification1061
34.1-5
Show that if an algorithm makes at most a constant number of calls to polynomial-
time subroutines and performs an additional amount of work that also takes polyno-
mial time, then it runs in polynomial time. Also show that a polynomial number of
calls to polynomial-time subroutines may result in an exponential-time algorithm.
34.1-6
Show that the class P, viewed as a set of languages, is closed under union, inter-
section, concatenation, complement, and Kleene star.  That is, ifL
1
;L
2
2P, then
L
1
[L
2
2P,L
1
\L
2
2P,L
1
L
2
2P,L
1
2P, andL

1
2P.
34.2  Polynomial-time verification
We now  look at algorithms  that  verify  membership  in languages.   For example,
suppose that for a given instancehG; u; ; kiof the decision problem PATH, we
are also given a pathpfromuto. We can easily check whetherpisapathinG
and whether the length ofpis at mostk, and if so, we can viewpas a “certificate”
that the instance indeed belongs to PATH.  For the decision problem PATH, this
certificate doesn’t seem to buy us much.  After all, PATH belongs to P—in fact,
we can  solve  PATH in  linear  time—and  so  verifying  membership  from  a given
certificate takes as long as solving the problem from scratch. We shall now examine
a problem for which we know of no polynomial-time decision algorithm and yet,
given a certificate, verification is easy.
Hamiltonian cycles
The problem of finding a hamiltonian cycle in an undirected graph has been stud-
ied for over a hundred years. Formally, ahamiltonian cycleof an undirected graph
GD.V; E/is a simple cycle that contains each vertex inV.  A graph that con-
tains a hamiltonian cycle is said to behamiltonian; otherwise, it isnonhamilto-
nian.  The name honors W. R. Hamilton, who described a mathematical game on
the dodecahedron (Figure 34.2(a)) in which one player sticks five pins in any five
consecutive vertices and the other player must complete the path to form a cycle

1062Chapter 34NP-Completeness
(a)(b)
Figure 34.2  (a)A  graph  representing  the  vertices,  edges,  and  faces  of  a  dodecahedron,  with a
hamiltonian cycle shown by shaded edges.(b)A bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices.
Any such graph is nonhamiltonian.
containing all the vertices.
7
The dodecahedron is hamiltonian, and Figure 34.2(a)
shows one hamiltonian cycle.  Not all graphs are hamiltonian,  however.  For ex-
ample,  Figure  34.2(b)  shows  a  bipartite  graph  with  an  odd  number  of  vertices.
Exercise 34.2-2 asks you to show that all such graphs are nonhamiltonian.
We can define thehamiltonian-cycle problem,“DoesagraphGhave a hamil-
tonian cycle?” as a formal language:
HAM-CYCLED
f
hGiWGis a hamiltonian graph
g
:
How might an algorithm  decide the language  HAM-CYCLE?  Given a problem
instancehGi, one possible decision algorithm lists all permutations of the vertices
ofGand then checks each permutation to see if it is a hamiltonian path.  What is
the running time of this algorithm? If we use the “reasonable” encoding of a graph
as its adjacency matrix, the numbermof vertices in the graph is.
p
n/,where
nD
j
hGi
j
is the length of the encoding ofG.TherearemŠpossible permutations
7
In a letter dated 17 October 1856 to his friend John T. Graves, Hamilton [157, p. 624] wrote, “I
have found that some young persons have been much amused by trying a new mathematical game
which the Icosion furnishes, one person sticking five pins in any five consecutive points ...and the
other player then aiming to insert, which by the theory in this letter can always be done, fifteen other
pins, in cyclical succession, so as to cover all the other points, and to end in immediate proximity to
the pin wherewith his antagonist had begun.”

34.2Polynomial-time verification1063
of the vertices, and therefore the running time is.mŠ/D.
p
nŠ/D.2
p
n
/,
which is notO.n
k
/for any constantk.  Thus,  this naive algorithm does not run
in polynomial time. In fact, the hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete, as we
shall prove in Section 34.5.
Verification algorithms
Consider  a slightly  easier  problem.   Suppose that  a friend tells you that a given
graphGis hamiltonian,  and then offers to prove it by giving you the vertices in
order along the hamiltonian cycle.  It would certainly be easy enough to verify the
proof:  simply verify that the provided cycle is hamiltonian by checking whether
it is a permutation of the vertices ofVand whether each of the consecutive edges
along the cycle actually exists in the graph.  You could certainly implement this
verification algorithm to run inO.n
2
/time, wherenis the length of the encoding
ofG.  Thus, a proof that a hamiltonian cycle exists in a graph can be verified in
polynomial time.
We defi ne averification algorithmas being a two-argument algorithmA,where
one argument is an ordinary input stringxand the other is a binary stringycalled
acertificate.  A two-argument algorithmAverifiesan input stringxif there exists
a certificateysuch  thatA.x; y/D1.Thelanguage verifiedby  a verification
algorithmAis
LD
f
x2
f
0; 1
g

Wthere existsy2
f
0; 1
g

such thatA.x; y/D1
g
:
Intuitively, an algorithmAverifies a languageLif for any stringx2L,there
exists a certificateythatAcan use to prove thatx2L.  Moreover, for any string
x62L,  there  must  be  no  certificate  proving  thatx2L.   For  example,  in  the
hamiltonian-cycle problem,  the certificate is the list of vertices in some hamilto-
nian cycle.  If a graph is hamiltonian,  the hamiltonian cycle itself offers enough
information  to verify  this  fact.   Conversely,  if  a graph  is not  hamiltonian,  there
can be no list of vertices that fools the verification algorithm into believing that the
graph is hamiltonian, since the verification algorithm carefully checks the proposed
“cycle” to be sure.

1064Chapter 34NP-Completeness
The complexity class NP
Thecomplexity classNPis the class of languages that can be verified by a poly-
nomial-time algorithm.
8
More precisely, a languageLbelongs to NP if and only if
there exist a two-input polynomial-time algorithmAand a constantcsuch that
LDfx2
f
0; 1
g

Wthere exists a certificateywith
j
y
j
DO.
j
x
j
c
/
such thatA.x; y/D1g:
We say that algorithmAverifieslanguageLin polynomial time.
From our earlier discussion on the hamiltonian-cycle problem, we now see that
HAM-CYCLE2NP. (It is always nice to know that an important set is nonempty.)
Moreover, ifL2P, thenL2NP, since if there is a polynomial-time algorithm
to decideL, the algorithm can be easily converted to a two-argument verification
algorithm that simply ignores any certificate and accepts exactly those input strings
it determines to be inL. Thus, PNP.
It is unknown whether PDNP, but most researchers believe that P and NP are
not the same class.  Intuitively, the class P consists of problems that can be solved
quickly.  The class NP consists of problems for which a solution can be verified
quickly.  You may have learned from experience that it is often more difficult to
solve a problem from scratch than to verify a clearly presented solution, especially
when working under  time constraints.   Theoretical  computer  scientists  generally
believe that this analogy extends to the classes P and NP, and thus that NP includes
languages that are not in P.
There is more compelling, though not conclusive, evidence that P¤NP—the
existence of languages that are “NP-complete.”  We shall study this class in Sec-
tion 34.3.
Many other fundamental questions beyond the P¤NP question remain unre-
solved.  Figure 34.3 shows some possible scenarios.  Despite much work by many
researchers,  no  one  even  knows  whether  the  class  NP  is  closed  under  comple-
ment.  That is, doesL2NP imply
L2NP?  We can define thecomplexity class
co-NPas the set of languagesLsuch that
L2NP.  We can restate the question
of whether NP is closed under complement as whether NPDco-NP.  Since P is
closed under complement (Exercise 34.1-6), it follows from Exercise 34.2-9 that
PNP\co-NP. Once again, however, no one knows whether PDNP\co-NP
or whether there is some language in NP\co-NPP.
8
The name “NP” stands for “nondeterministic polynomial time.” The class NP was originally studied
in the context of nondeterminism, but this book uses the somewhat simpler yet equivalent notion of
verification.  Hopcroft and Ullman [180] give a good presentation of NP-completeness in terms of
nondeterministic models of computation.

34.2Polynomial-time verification1065
co-NPNP
(c)
P = NP ∩ co-NP
co-NPNP
(d)
P
P = NP = co-NP
(a)
NP = co-NP
(b)
P
NP∩ co-NP
Figure 34.3Four possibilities for relationships among complexity classes.  In each diagram, one
region enclosing another indicates a proper-subset relation.(a)PDNPDco-NP. Most researchers
regard this possibility as the most unlikely.(b)If NP is closed under complement, then NPDco-NP,
but it need not be the case that PDNP.(c)PDNP\co-NP, but NP is not closed under complement.
(d)NP¤co-NP and P¤NP\co-NP. Most researchers regard this possibility as the most likely.
Thus, our understanding of the precise relationship between P and NP is woe-
fully incomplete.  Nevertheless, even though we might not be able to prove that a
particular problem is intractable, if we can prove that it is NP-complete, then we
have gained valuable information about it.
Exercises
34.2-1
Consider the languageGRAPH-ISOMORPHISMDfhG
1
;G
2
iWG
1
andG
2
are
isomorphic graphsg.  Prove that GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM2NP by describing a
polynomial-time algorithm to verify the language.
34.2-2
Prove that ifGis an undirected bipartite graph with an odd number of vertices,
thenGis nonhamiltonian.
34.2-3
Show  that  if  HAM-CYCLE2P,  then  the  problem  of  listing  the  vertices  of  a
hamiltonian cycle, in order, is polynomial-time solvable.

1066Chapter 34NP-Completeness
34.2-4
Prove that the class NP of languages is closed under union, intersection, concate-
nation, and Kleene star. Discuss the closure of NP under complement.
34.2-5
Show  that  any  language  in  NP  can  be  decided  by  an  algorithm  running  in
time2
O.n
k
/
for some constantk.
34.2-6
Ahamiltonian pathin a graph  is a simple  path  that visits  every vertex  exactly
once.  Show that the language HAM-PATHDfhG; u; iWthere is a hamiltonian
path fromutoin graphGgbelongs to NP.
34.2-7
Show  that  the  hamiltonian-path  problem  from  Exercise  34.2-6  can  be  solved  in
polynomial  time on directed  acyclic  graphs.   Give an efficient  algorithm  for  the
problem.
34.2-8
Letbe a boolean formula constructed from the boolean input variablesx
1
;x
2
;
:::;x
k
, negations (:), ANDs (^), ORs (_), and parentheses.  The formulais a
tautologyif it evaluates to1for every assignment of1and0to the input variables.
Define TAUTOLOGY as the language  of  boolean  formulas  that  are tautologies.
Show that TAUTOLOGY2co-NP.
34.2-9
Prove that Pco-NP.
34.2-10
Prove that if NP¤co-NP, then P¤NP.
34.2-11
LetGbe a connected, undirected graph with at least3vertices, and letG
3
be the
graph obtained by connecting all pairs of vertices that are connected by a path inG
of length at most3. Prove thatG
3
is hamiltonian. (Hint:Construct a spanning tree
forG, and use an inductive argument.)

34.3NP-completeness and reducibility1067
34.3  NP-completeness and reducibility
Perhaps the most  compelling  reason  why theoretical  computer  scientists  believe
that P¤NP comes from the existence of the class of “NP-complete” problems.
This  class  has  the  intriguing  property  that  ifanyNP-complete  problem  can  be
solved in polynomial time, theneveryproblem in NP has a polynomial-time solu-
tion, that is, PDNP. Despite years of study, though, no polynomial-time algorithm
has ever been discovered for any NP-complete problem.
The language HAM-CYCLE is one NP-complete problem.  If we could decide
HAM-CYCLE in polynomial time, then we could solve every problem in NP in
polynomial time.  In fact, if NPP should turn out to be nonempty, we could say
with certainty that HAM-CYCLE2NPP.
The NP-complete languages are, in a sense, the “hardest” languages in NP.  In
this section,  we shall show how to compare the relative “hardness” of languages
using  a precise  notion  called  “polynomial-time  reducibility.”   Then we formally
define  the NP-complete  languages,  and  we finish  by sketching  a proof  that  one
such language, called CIRCUIT-SAT, is NP-complete.  In Sections 34.4 and 34.5,
we shall use the notion of reducibility to show that many other problems are NP-
complete.
Reducibility
Intuitively, a problemQcan be reduced to another problemQ
0
if any instance ofQ
can be “easily rephrased” as an instance ofQ
0
, the solution to which provides a
solution to the instance ofQ. For example, the problem of solving linear equations
in an indeterminatexreduces to the problem of solving quadratic equations. Given
an instanceaxCbD0, we transform it to0x
2
CaxCbD0, whose solution
provides  a solution  toaxCbD0.   Thus,  if  a problemQreduces  to  another
problemQ
0
,thenQis, in a sense, “no harder to solve” thanQ
0
.
Returning to our formal-language framework for decision problems, we say that
a languageL
1
ispolynomial-time reducibleto a languageL
2
, writtenL
1

P
L
2
,
if there exists a polynomial-time computable functionfW
f
0; 1
g

!
f
0; 1
g

such
that for allx2
f
0; 1
g

,
x2L
1
if and only iff.x/2L
2
:(34.1)
We call the functionfthereduction function, and a polynomial-time algorithmF
that computesfis areduction algorithm.
Figure  34.4  illustrates  the  idea  of  a  polynomial-time  reduction  from  a  lan-
guageL
1
to  another  languageL
2
.   Each  language  is  a  subset  of
f
0; 1
g

.The
reduction functionfprovides a polynomial-time  mapping such that ifx2L
1
,

1068Chapter 34NP-Completeness
L
2
L
1
{0,1}*{0,1}*f
Figure 34.4An illustration of a polynomial-time reduction from a languageL
1
to a languageL
2
via a reduction functionf. For any inputx2
f
0; 1
g

, the question of whetherx2L
1
has the same
answer as the question of whetherf.x/2L
2
.
thenf.x/2L
2
. Moreover, ifx62L
1
,thenf.x/62L
2
. Thus, the reduction func-
tion maps any instancexof the decision problem represented by the languageL
1
to an instancef.x/of  the problem  represented  byL
2
.   Providing  an answer to
whetherf.x/2L
2
directly provides the answer to whetherx2L
1
.
Polynomial-time reductions give us a powerful tool for proving that various lan-
guages belong to P.
Lemma 34.3
IfL
1
;L
2

f
0; 1
g

are  languages  such  thatL
1

P
L
2
,thenL
2
2P  implies
L
1
2P.
ProofLetA
2
be a polynomial-time  algorithm  that decidesL
2
,andletFbe a
polynomial-time reduction algorithm that computes the reduction functionf.We
shall construct a polynomial-time algorithmA
1
that decidesL
1
.
Figure  34.5  illustrates  how  we constructA
1
.   For  a given  inputx2
f
0; 1
g

,
algorithmA
1
usesFto transformxintof.x/, and then it usesA
2
to test whether
f.x/2L
2
.  AlgorithmA
1
takes the output from algorithmA
2
and produces that
answer as its own output.
The correctness ofA
1
follows from condition (34.1). The algorithm runs in poly-
nomial time, since bothFandA
2
run in polynomial time (see Exercise 34.1-5).
NP-completeness
Polynomial-time  reductions  provide  a formal  means for  showing  that  one prob-
lem is at least as hard as another,  to within a polynomial-time factor.  That is, if
L
1

P
L
2
,thenL
1
is not more than a polynomial factor harder thanL
2
,whichis

34.3NP-completeness and reducibility1069
x
F
f.x/
A
1
A
2
yes,f.x/2L
2
no,f.x/62L
2
yes,x2L
1
no,x62L
1
Figure 34.5The proof of Lemma 34.3. The algorithmFis a reduction algorithm that computes the
reduction functionffromL
1
toL
2
in polynomial time, andA
2
is a polynomial-time algorithm that
decidesL
2
. AlgorithmA
1
decides whetherx2L
1
by usingFto transform any inputxintof.x/
and then usingA
2
to decide whetherf.x/2L
2
.
why the “less than or equal to” notation for reduction is mnemonic.  We can now
define the set of NP-complete languages, which are the hardest problems in NP.
A languageL
f
0; 1
g

isNP-completeif
1.L2NP, and
2.L
0

P
Lfor everyL
0
2NP.
If a languageLsatisfies property 2, but not necessarily property 1, we say thatL
isNP-hard. We also define NPC to be the class of NP-complete languages.
As the following  theorem  shows,  NP-completeness  is at the crux  of deciding
whether P is in fact equal to NP.
Theorem 34.4
If any NP-complete problem is polynomial-time solvable, then PDNP.  Equiva-
lently, if any problem in NP is not polynomial-time solvable, then no NP-complete
problem is polynomial-time solvable.
ProofSuppose  thatL2P  and  also  thatL2NPC.   For  anyL
0
2NP,  we
haveL
0

P
Lby  property  2  of  the  definition  of  NP-completeness.   Thus,  by
Lemma 34.3,  we also have thatL
0
2P,  which proves the first statement  of the
theorem.
To prove the second statement, note that it is the contrapositive of the first state-
ment.
It is for this reason that research into the P¤NP question centers around the
NP-complete problems. Most theoretical computer scientists believe that P¤NP,
which leads  to the relationships  among P,  NP,  and  NPC shown  in Figure  34.6.
But,  for  all  we know,  someone  may yet  come up  with a polynomial-time  algo-
rithm for an NP-complete problem, thus proving that PDNP. Nevertheless, since
no polynomial-time algorithm for any NP-complete problem has yet been discov-

1070Chapter 34NP-Completeness
NPC
P
NP
Figure 34.6How  most  theoretical  computer  scientists  view  the  relationships  among  P,  NP,
and NPC. Both P and NPC are wholly contained within NP, and P\NPCD;.
ered, a proof that a problem is NP-complete provides excellent evidence that it is
intractable.
Circuit satisfiability
We have defined the notion of an NP-complete problem, but up to this point, we
have not actually proved that any problem is NP-complete.  Once we prove that at
least one problem is NP-complete, we can use polynomial-time reducibility as a
tool to prove other problems to be NP-complete.  Thus, we now focus on demon-
strating the existence of an NP-complete problem:  the circuit-satisfiability  prob-
lem.
Unfortunately,  the  formal  proof  that  the  circuit-satisfiability  problem  is  NP-
complete requires technical detail beyond the scope of this text.  Instead, we shall
informally describe a proof that relies on a basic understanding of boolean combi-
national circuits.
Boolean combinational circuits are built from boolean combinational elements
that are interconnected by wires. Aboolean combinational elementis any circuit
element that has a constant number of boolean inputs and outputs and that performs
a well-defined  function.   Boolean  values are drawn from the set
f
0; 1
g
,where0
represents
FALSEand1representsTRUE.
The boolean combinational elements that we use in the circuit-satisfiability prob-
lem compute simple boolean functions,  and they are known aslogic gates.Fig-
ure 34.7 shows the three basic logic gates that we use in the circuit-satisfiability
problem:  theNOT gate(orinverter), theAND gate,andtheOR gate.TheNOT
gate takes a single binaryinputx, whose value is either0or1,  and produces  a
binaryoutput ́whose value is opposite that of the input value.  Each of the other
two gates takes two binary inputsxandyand produces a single binary output ́.
We can describe the operation of each gate, and of any boolean combinational
element, by atruth table, shown under each gate in Figure 34.7. A truth table gives
the outputs of the combinational element for each possible setting of the inputs. For

34.3NP-completeness and reducibility1071
x
y
z
x
y
z
00   0
01   0
10   0
11   1
00   0
01   1
10   1
11   1
(b)(c)
xz
01
10
(a)
xxxyy:xx^yx_y
Figure 34.7Three basic logic gates, with binary inputs and outputs.  Under each gate is the truth
table that describes the gate’s operation.(a)The NOT gate.(b)The AND gate.(c)The OR gate.
example, the truth table for the OR gate tells us that when the inputs arexD0
andyD1, the output value is ́D1.  We use the symbols:to denote the NOT
function,^to denote the AND function, and_to denote the OR function.  Thus,
for example,0_1D1.
We can generalize AND and OR gates to take more than two inputs.  An AND
gate’s output is1if all of its inputs are1, and its output is0otherwise. An OR gate’s
output is1if any of its inputs are1, and its output is0otherwise.
Aboolean combinational circuitconsists of one or more boolean combinational
elements interconnected bywires.  A wire can connect the output of one element
to the input of another, thereby providing the output value of the first element as an
input value of the second.  Figure 34.8 shows two similar boolean combinational
circuits, differing in only one gate.  Part (a) of the figure also shows the values on
the individual wires, given the inputhx
1
D1; x
2
D1; x
3
D0i.  Although a single
wire may have no more than one combinational-element output connected to it, it
can feed several element inputs.  The number of element inputs fed by a wire is
called thefan-outof the wire. If no element output is connected to a wire, the wire
is acircuit input, accepting input values from an external source.  If no element
input is connected to a wire, the wire is acircuit output, providing the results of
the circuit’s computation to the outside world.  (An internal wire can also fan out
to a circuit output.)  For the purpose of defining the circuit-satisfiability problem,
we limit the number of circuit outputs to1, though in actual hardware design,  a
boolean combinational circuit may have multiple outputs.
Boolean combinational circuits contain no cycles.  In other words, suppose we
create a directed graphGD.V; E/with one vertex for each combinational element
and withkdirected  edges for each wire whose fan-out  isk;  the graph  contains
a directed  edge.u; /if a wire connects  the output  of  elementuto an input  of
element.ThenGmust be acyclic.

1072Chapter 34NP-Completeness
x
3
x
2
x
1
(a)
1
1
0
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
0
0
1
1
1
1
x
3
x
2
x
1
(b)
Figure 34.8Two  instances  of  the  circuit-satisfiability  problem.(a)The  assignmenthx
1
D1;
x
2
D1; x
3
D0ito the inputs of this circuit causes  the output of the circuit to be1.  The circuit
is therefore satisfiable.(b)No assignment to the inputs of this circuit can cause the output of the
circuit to be1. The circuit is therefore unsatisfiable.
Atruth assignmentfor a boolean combinational circuit is a set of boolean input
values.  We say that a one-output boolean combinational circuit issatisfiableif it
has asatisfying assignment: a truth assignment that causes the output of the circuit
to be1.  For example, the circuit in Figure 34.8(a) has the satisfying assignment
hx
1
D1; x
2
D1; x
3
D0i, and so it is satisfiable.  As Exercise 34.3-1 asks you to
show, no assignment of values tox
1
,x
2
,andx
3
causes the circuit in Figure 34.8(b)
to produce a1output; it always produces0, and so it is unsatisfiable.
Thecircuit-satisfiability problemis,  “Given  a  boolean  combinational  circuit
composed of AND, OR, and NOT gates, is it satisfiable?”  In order to pose this
question  formally,  however,  we must  agree  on a standard  encoding  for  circuits.
Thesizeof  a boolean  combinational  circuit  is the number  of  boolean  combina-
tional elements plus the number of wires in the circuit. We could devise a graphlike
encoding that maps any given circuitCinto a binary stringhCiwhose length is
polynomial in the size of the circuit itself. As a formal language, we can therefore
define
CIRCUIT-SATD
f
hCiWCis a satisfiable boolean combinational circuit
g
:
The circuit-satisfiability problem arises in the area of computer-aided hardware
optimization.   If  a subcircuit  always  produces0,  that  subcircuit  is  unnecessary;
the designer can replace it by a simpler subcircuit that omits all logic gates and
provides the constant0value as its output. You can see why we would like to have
a polynomial-time algorithm for this problem.
Given a circuitC,  we might attempt to determine  whether it is satisfiable  by
simply checking all possible assignments to the inputs. Unfortunately, if the circuit
haskinputs, then we would have to check up to2
k
possible assignments.  When

34.3NP-completeness and reducibility1073
the size ofCis polynomial ink, checking each one takes.2
k
/time, which is
superpolynomial  in the size of the circuit.
9
In fact, as we have claimed, there is
strong evidence that no polynomial-time  algorithm  exists that solves the circuit-
satisfiability problem because circuit satisfiability is NP-complete.  We break the
proof of this fact into two parts,  based on the two parts of the definition of NP-
completeness.
Lemma 34.5
The circuit-satisfiability problem belongs to the class NP.
ProofWe shall provide a two-input, polynomial-time algorithmAthat can verify
CIRCUIT-SAT. Oneof the inputs toAis (a standard encoding of) a boolean com-
binational circuitC. The other input is a certificate corresponding to an assignment
of boolean values to the wires inC. (See Exercise 34.3-4 for a smaller certificate.)
We construct the algorithmAas follows.  For each logic gate in the circuit, it
checks  that  the value  provided  by  the  certificate  on the  output  wire is correctly
computed as a function of the values on the input wires. Then, if the output of the
entire circuit is1, the algorithm outputs1, since the values assigned to the inputs
ofCprovide a satisfying assignment. Otherwise,Aoutputs0.
Whenever a satisfiable circuitCis input to algorithmA, there exists a certificate
whose length is polynomial in the size ofCand that causesAto output a1. When-
ever an unsatisfiable circuit is input, no certificate can foolAinto believing that
the circuit is satisfiable. AlgorithmAruns in polynomial time: with a good imple-
mentation, linear time suffices. Thus, wecan verify CIRCUIT-SAT in polynomial
time, and CIRCUIT-SAT2NP.
The second part of proving that CIRCUIT-SAT is NP-complete is to show that
the  language  is  NP-hard.   That  is,  we  must  show  that  every  language  in  NP  is
polynomial-time reducible to CIRCUIT-SAT.  The actual proof of this fact is full
of technical intricacies,  and so we shall settle for a sketch of the proof based on
some understanding of the workings of computer hardware.
A computer  program  is  stored  in  the  computer  memory  as  a sequence  of  in-
structions.  A typical instruction encodes an operation to be performed, addresses
of operands in memory,  and an address where the result is to be stored.  A spe-
cial memory location, called theprogram counter, keeps track of which instruc-
9
On the other hand,  if the size of the circuitCis‚.2
k
/,  then an algorithm whose  running time
isO.2
k
/has  a  running  time that  is  polynomial  in the  circuit  size.   Even if  P¤NP,  this situa-
tion would not contradict the NP-completeness of the problem; the existence of a polynomial-time
algorithm for a special case does not imply that there is a polynomial-time algorithm for all cases.

1074Chapter 34NP-Completeness
tion is to be executed next.  The program counter automatically increments upon
fetching each instruction, thereby causing the computer to execute instructions se-
quentially.  The execution of an instruction can cause a value to be written to the
program counter, however, which alters the normal sequential execution and allows
the computer to loop and perform conditional branches.
At any point during the execution of a program, the computer’s memory holds
the entire state of the computation.  (We take the memory to include the program
itself,  the program counter,  working storage,  and any of the various bits of state
that a computer maintains for bookkeeping.)  We call any particular state of com-
puter  memory aconfiguration.   We can view the execution  of an instruction  as
mapping one configuration to another.  The computer hardware that accomplishes
this mapping can be implemented as a boolean combinational  circuit,  which we
denote byMin the proof of the following lemma.
Lemma 34.6
The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-hard.
ProofLetLbe any language in NP.  We shall describe a polynomial-time algo-
rithmFcomputing a reduction  functionfthat maps every binary stringxto a
circuitCDf.x/such thatx2Lif and only ifC2CIRCUIT-SAT.
SinceL2NP, there must exist an algorithmAthat verifiesLin polynomial
time.  The algorithmFthat we shall construct uses the two-input algorithmAto
compute the reduction functionf.
LetT .n/denote the worst-case running time of algorithmAon length-ninput
strings, and letk1be a constant such thatT .n/DO.n
k
/and the length of the
certificate isO.n
k
/.  (The running time ofAis actually a polynomial in the total
input size, which includes both an input string and a certificate, but since the length
of the certificate is polynomial in the lengthnof the input string, the running time
is polynomial inn.)
The basic idea of the proof is to represent the computation ofAas a sequence
of configurations.  As Figure 34.9 illustrates, we can break each configuration into
parts consisting of the program forA, the program counter and auxiliary machine
state, the inputx, the certificatey, and working storage.  The combinational  cir-
cuitM, which implements the computer hardware, maps each configurationc
i
to
the next configurationc
iC1
, starting from the initial configurationc
0
. AlgorithmA
writes its output—0or1—to some designated location by the time it finishes ex-
ecuting, and if we assume that thereafterAhalts, the value never changes.  Thus,
if the algorithm runs for at mostT .n/steps, the output appears as one of the bits
inc
T.n/
.
The reduction algorithmFconstructs a single combinational circuit that com-
putes all configurations produced by a given initial configuration.  The idea is to

34.3NP-completeness and reducibility1075
M
APCaux machine statexyworking storage
APCaux machine statexyworking storage
M
APCaux machine statexyworking storage
M
APCaux machine statexy
...
working storage
0/1 output
M
c
0
c
1
c
2
c
T(n)
Figure 34.9The sequence of configurations produced by an algorithmArunning on an inputxand
certificatey. Each configuration represents the state of the computer for one step of the computation
and, besidesA,x,andy, includes the program counter (PC), auxiliary machine state, and working
storage. Except for the certificatey, the initial configurationc
0
is constant. A boolean combinational
circuitMmaps each configuration to the next configuration. The output is a distinguished bit in the
working storage.

1076Chapter 34NP-Completeness
paste togetherT .n/copies of the circuitM.  The output of theith circuit, which
produces configurationc
i
, feeds directly into the input of the.iC1/st circuit. Thus,
the configurations, rather than being stored in the computer’s memory, simply re-
side as values on the wires connecting copies ofM.
Recall what the polynomial-time reduction algorithmFmust do.  Given an in-
putx, it must compute a circuitCDf.x/that is satisfiable if and only if there
exists a certificateysuch thatA.x; y/D1.WhenFobtains an inputx,itfirst
computesnD
j
x
j
and constructs a combinational  circuitC
0
consisting ofT .n/
copies ofM. The input toC
0
is an initial configuration corresponding to a compu-
tation onA.x; y/, and the output is the configurationc
T.n/
.
AlgorithmFmodifies  circuitC
0
slightly  to construct  the circuitCDf.x/.
First, it wires the inputs toC
0
corresponding to the program forA, the initial pro-
gram counter, the inputx, and the initial state of memory directly to these known
values.   Thus,  the  only remaining  inputs  to the circuit  correspond  to the certifi-
catey.   Second,  it  ignores  all  outputs  fromC
0
,  except  for  the  one  bit  ofc
T.n/
corresponding  to  the  output  ofA.    This  circuitC,  so  constructed,  computes
C.y/DA.x; y/for  any  inputyof  lengthO.n
k
/.   The  reduction  algorithmF,
when provided an input stringx, computes such a circuitCand outputs it.
We need to prove two properties. First, we must show thatFcorrectly computes
a reduction functionf.  That is, we must show thatCis satisfiable if and only if
there exists a certificateysuch thatA.x; y/D1.  Second, we must show thatF
runs in polynomial time.
To show thatFcorrectly computes a reduction function, let us suppose that there
exists a certificateyof lengthO.n
k
/such thatA.x; y/D1. Then, if we apply the
bits ofyto the inputs ofC, the output ofCisC.y/DA.x; y/D1.  Thus, if a
certificate exists, thenCis satisfiable.  For the other direction, suppose thatCis
satisfiable.  Hence, there exists an inputytoCsuch thatC.y/D1, from which
we conclude thatA.x; y/D1. Thus,Fcorrectly computes a reduction function.
To complete the proof sketch, we need only show thatFruns in time polynomial
innD
j
x
j
.  The first observation we make is that the number of bits required to
represent a configuration is polynomial inn. The program forAitself has constant
size, independent of the length of its inputx.  The length of the inputxisn,and
the length of the certificateyisO.n
k
/. Since the algorithm runs for at mostO.n
k
/
steps,  the amount  of working storage  required  byAis polynomial  innas well.
(We assume that this memory is contiguous;  Exercise 34.3-5 asks you to extend
the argument  to the situation in which the locations accessed byAare scattered
across a much larger region of memory and the particular pattern of scattering can
differ for each inputx.)
The  combinational  circuitMimplementing  the  computer  hardware  has  size
polynomial in the length of a configuration, which isO.n
k
/; hence, the size ofM
is polynomial  inn.  (Most of this circuitry implements the logic of the memory

34.3NP-completeness and reducibility1077
system.)  The circuitCconsists of at mosttDO.n
k
/copies ofM, and hence it
has size polynomial inn.  The reduction algorithmFcan constructCfromxin
polynomial time, since each step of the construction takes polynomial time.
The language CIRCUIT-SAT is therefore at least as hard as any language in NP,
and since it belongs to NP, it is NP-complete.
Theorem 34.7
The circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete.
ProofImmediate  from  Lemmas 34.5 and  34.6 and  from  the  definition  of  NP-
completeness.
Exercises
34.3-1
Verify that the circuit in Figure 34.8(b) is unsatisfiable.
34.3-2
Show that the
P
relation is a transitive relation on languages. That is, show that if
L
1

P
L
2
andL
2

P
L
3
,thenL
1

P
L
3
.
34.3-3
Prove thatL
P
Lif and only ifL
P
L.
34.3-4
Show that we could have used a satisfying assignment as a certificate in an alter-
native proof of Lemma 34.5. Which certificate makes for an easier proof?
34.3-5
The proof of Lemma 34.6 assumes that the working storage for algorithmAoccu-
pies a contiguous region of polynomial size. Where in the proof do we exploit this
assumption? Argue that this assumption does not involve any loss of generality.
34.3-6
A languageLiscompletefor a language classCwith respect to polynomial-time
reductions ifL2CandL
0

P
Lfor allL
0
2C.  Show that;and
f
0; 1
g

are the
only languages in P that are not complete for P with respect to polynomial-time
reductions.

1078Chapter 34NP-Completeness
34.3-7
Show that, with respect to polynomial-time reductions (see Exercise 34.3-6),Lis
complete for NP if and only if
Lis complete for co-NP.
34.3-8
The  reduction  algorithmFin  the  proof  of  Lemma  34.6  constructs  the  circuit
CDf.x/based  on  knowledge  ofx,A,andk.   Professor  Sartre  observes  that
the stringxis input toF, but only the existence ofA,k, and the constant factor
implicit in theO.n
k
/running time is known toF(since the languageLbelongs
to NP), not their actual values.  Thus, the professor concludes thatFcan’t possi-
bly construct the circuitCand that the language CIRCUIT-SATis not necessarily
NP-hard. Explain the flaw in the professor’s reasoning.
34.4  NP-completeness proofs
We proved that the circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete by a direct proof
thatL
P
CIRCUIT-SAT for every languageL2NP.  In this section, we shall
show how to prove that languages are NP-complete without directly reducingevery
language  in  NP to  the  given  language.   We shall  illustrate  this  methodology  by
proving that various formula-satisfiability problems are NP-complete. Section 34.5
provides many more examples of the methodology.
The following lemma is the basis of our method for showing that a language is
NP-complete.
Lemma 34.8
IfLis a language such thatL
0

P
Lfor someL
0
2NPC, thenLis NP-hard. If, in
addition,L2NP, thenL2NPC.
ProofSinceL
0
is NP-complete, for allL
00
2NP, we haveL
00

P
L
0
.  By sup-
position,L
0

P
L, and thus by transitivity (Exercise 34.3-2), we haveL
00

P
L,
which shows thatLis NP-hard. IfL2NP, we also haveL2NPC.
In other words, by reducing a known NP-complete languageL
0
toL, we implic-
itly reduce every language in NP toL.  Thus, Lemma 34.8 gives us a method for
proving that a languageLis NP-complete:
1.   ProveL2NP.
2.   Select a known NP-complete languageL
0
.

34.4NP-completeness proofs1079
3.  Describe  an  algorithm  that  computes  a  functionfmapping  every  instance
x2
f
0; 1
g

ofL
0
to an instancef.x/ofL.
4.  Prove  that  the  functionfsatisfiesx2L
0
if  and  only  iff.x/2Lfor  all
x2
f
0; 1
g

.
5.  Prove that the algorithm computingfruns in polynomial time.
(Steps 2–5 show thatLis NP-hard.)  This methodology  of reducing from a sin-
gle known NP-complete language is far simpler than the more complicated pro-
cess  of  showing  directly  how  to  reduce  from  every  language  in  NP.   Proving
CIRCUIT-SAT2NPC has given us a “foot in the door.” Because we know that the
circuit-satisfiability problem is NP-complete, we now can prove much more easily
that other problems are NP-complete. Moreover, as we develop a catalog of known
NP-complete problems, we will have more and more choices for languages from
which to reduce.
Formula satisfiability
We illustrate the reduction methodology by giving an NP-completeness proof for
the problem of determining whether a boolean formula, not a circuit, is satisfiable.
This problem has the historical honor of being the first problem ever shown to be
NP-complete.
We formulate the(formula) satisfiabilityproblem in terms of the language SAT
as follows. An instance of SAT is a boolean formulacomposed of
1.nboolean variables:x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
;
2.mboolean connectives:  any boolean function with one or two inputs and one
output, such as^(AND),_(OR),:(NOT),!(implication),$(if and only
if); and
3.  parentheses. (Without loss of generality, we assume that there are no redundant
parentheses, i.e., a formula contains at most one pair of parentheses per boolean
connective.)
We can easily encode a boolean formulain a length that is polynomial innCm.
As in boolean combinational circuits, atruth assignmentfor a boolean formula
is  a  set  of  values  for  the  variables  of,andasatisfying assignmentis  a  truth
assignment that causes it to evaluate to1.  A formula with a satisfying assignment
is asatisfiableformula.  The satisfiability problem asks whether a given boolean
formula is satisfiable; in formal-language terms,
SATD
f
hiWis a satisfiable boolean formula
g
:
As an example, the formula

1080Chapter 34NP-Completeness
D..x
1
!x
2
/_:..:x
1
$x
3
/_x
4
//^:x
2
has the satisfying assignmenthx
1
D0; x
2
D0; x
3
D1; x
4
D1i,since
D..0!0/_:..:0$1/_1//^:0(34.2)
D.1_:.1_1//^1
D.1_0/^1
D1;
and thus this formulabelongs to SAT.
The naive algorithm to determine whether an arbitrary boolean formula is satis-
fiable does not run in polynomial time. A formula withnvariables has2
n
possible
assignments.  If the length ofhiis polynomial inn, then checking every assign-
ment requires.2
n
/time, which is superpolynomial in the length ofhi.Asthe
following theorem shows, a polynomial-time algorithm is unlikely to exist.
Theorem 34.9
Satisfiability of boolean formulas is NP-complete.
ProofWe start by arguing that SAT2NP. Then we prove that SAT is NP-hard by
showing that CIRCUIT-SAT
P
SAT; by Lemma 34.8, this will prove the theorem.
To  show  that  SAT  belongs  to  NP,  we  show  that  a  certificate  consisting  of  a
satisfying assignment for an input formulacan be verified in polynomial time.
The verifying algorithm simply replaces each variable in the formula with its cor-
responding  value  and  then  evaluates  the  expression,  much  as  we  did  in  equa-
tion (34.2) above.  This task is easy to do in polynomial  time.  If the expression
evaluates to1, then the algorithm has verified that the formula is satisfiable. Thus,
the first condition of Lemma 34.8 for NP-completeness holds.
To prove that SAT is NP-hard, we show that CIRCUIT-SAT
P
SAT.  In other
words, we need to show how to reduce any instance of circuit satisfiability to an
instance  of  formula  satisfiability  in  polynomial  time.   We  can  use  induction  to
express any boolean combinational circuit as a boolean formula.  We simply look
at  the  gate  that  produces  the  circuit  output  and  inductively  express  each  of  the
gate’s inputs as formulas. We then obtain the formula for the circuit by writing an
expression that applies the gate’s function to its inputs’ formulas.
Unfortunately,  this straightforward  method  does not  amount  to a polynomial-
time reduction.  As Exercise 34.4-1 asks you to show, shared subformulas—which
arise  from  gates  whose  output  wires  have  fan-out  of  2  or  more—can  cause  the
size of the generated formula to grow exponentially. Thus, the reduction algorithm
must be somewhat more clever.
Figure 34.10  illustrates  how we overcome  this problem,  using  as an example
the circuit from Figure 34.8(a).  For each wirex
i
in the circuitC, the formula

34.4NP-completeness proofs1081
x
6
x
3
x
4
x
7
x
10
x
9
x
8
x
5
x
2
x
1
Figure 34.10Reducing circuit satisfiability to formula satisfiability. The formula produced by the
reduction algorithm has a variable for each wire in the circuit.
has a variablex
i
.  We can now express how each gate operates as a small formula
involving  the  variables  of  its incident  wires.   For  example,  the  operation  of  the
output AND gate isx
10
$.x
7
^x
8
^x
9
/. We call each of these small formulas a
clause.
The formulaproduced by the reduction algorithm is the AND of the circuit-
output  variable with the conjunction  of clauses  describing  the operation  of each
gate. For the circuit in the figure, the formula is
Dx
10
^.x
4
$:x
3
/
^.x
5
$.x
1
_x
2
//
^.x
6
$:x
4
/
^.x
7
$.x
1
^x
2
^x
4
//
^.x
8
$.x
5
_x
6
//
^.x
9
$.x
6
_x
7
//
^.x
10
$.x
7
^x
8
^x
9
// :
Given a circuitC, it is straightforward to produce such a formulain polynomial
time.
Why is the circuitCsatisfiable exactly when the formulais satisfiable?  IfC
has a satisfying assignment, then each wire of the circuit has a well-defined value,
and  the  output  of  the  circuit  is1.   Therefore,  when  we  assign  wire  values  to
variables  in,  each  clause  ofevaluates  to1,  and  thus  the  conjunction  of  all
evaluates  to1.   Conversely,  if  some  assignment  causesto  evaluate  to1,the
circuitCis  satisfiable  by  an  analogous  argument.   Thus,  we  have  shown  that
CIRCUIT-SAT
P
SAT, which completes the proof.

1082Chapter 34NP-Completeness
3-CNF satisfiability
We can prove many problems NP-complete by reducing from formula satisfiability.
The reduction algorithm must handle any input formula, though, and this require-
ment can lead to a huge number of cases that we must consider.  We often prefer
to reduce from a restricted language of boolean formulas, so that we need to con-
sider  fewer cases.   Of course,  we must not restrict  the language  so much that  it
becomes polynomial-time solvable. One convenient language is 3-CNF satisfiabil-
ity, or 3-CNF-SAT.
We define 3-CNF satisfiability using the following terms. Aliteralin a boolean
formula  is an occurrence  of a variable  or its negation.   A boolean  formula is in
conjunctive normal form,orCNF, if it is expressed as an AND ofclauses, each
of which is the OR of one or more literals.  A boolean formula is in3-conjunctive
normal form,or3-CNF, if each clause has exactly three distinct literals.
For example, the boolean formula
.x
1
_:x
1
_:x
2
/^.x
3
_x
2
_x
4
/^.:x
1
_:x
3
_:x
4
/
is in 3-CNF. The first of its three clauses is.x
1
_:x
1
_:x
2
/, which contains the
three literalsx
1
,:x
1
,and:x
2
.
In 3-CNF-SAT, we are asked whether a given boolean formulain 3-CNF is
satisfiable.   The following theorem  shows that a polynomial-time  algorithm  that
can determine the satisfiability of boolean formulas is unlikely to exist, even when
they are expressed in this simple normal form.
Theorem 34.10
Satisfiability of boolean formulas in 3-conjunctive normal form is NP-complete.
ProofThe argument we used in the proof of Theorem 34.9 to show that SAT2
NP applies equally well here to show that 3-CNF-SAT2NP.  By Lemma 34.8,
therefore, we need only show that SAT
P
3-CNF-SAT.
We break the reduction algorithm into three basic steps. Each step progressively
transforms the input formulacloser to the desired 3-conjunctive normal form.
The  first  step  is  similar  to  the  one  used  to  prove  CIRCUIT-SAT
P
SAT in
Theorem 34.9.  First, we construct a binary “parse” tree for the input formula,
with literals as leaves and connectives as internal nodes.  Figure 34.11 shows such
a parse tree for the formula
D..x
1
!x
2
/_:..:x
1
$x
3
/_x
4
//^:x
2
:(34.3)
Should the input formula contain a clause such as the OR of several literals, we use
associativity to parenthesize the expression fully so that every internal node in the
resulting tree has1or2children.  We can now think of the binary parse tree as a
circuit for computing the function.

34.4NP-completeness proofs1083
:x
1
x
1
:x
2
x
2
x
3
x
4
y
1
y
2
y
3
y
4
y
5
y
6
^
$
_
_
:!
Figure 34.11The tree corresponding to the formulaD..x
1
!x
2
/_:..:x
1
$x
3
/_x
4
//^:x
2
:
Mimicking  the  reduction  in  the  proof  of  Theorem  34.9,  we  introduce  a  vari-
abley
i
for  the output  of  each internal  node.   Then,  we rewrite the original  for-
mulaas the AND of the root variable and a conjunction of clauses describing the
operation of each node. For the formula (34.3), the resulting expression is

0
Dy
1
^.y
1
$.y
2
^:x
2
//
^.y
2
$.y
3
_y
4
//
^.y
3
$.x
1
!x
2
//
^.y
4
$:y
5
/
^.y
5
$.y
6
_x
4
//
^.y
6
$.:x
1
$x
3
// :
Observe that the formula
0
thus obtained is a conjunction of clauses
0
i
, each of
which has at most 3 literals.  The only requirement that we might fail to meet is
that each clause has to be an OR of3literals.
The second step of the reduction converts each clause
0
i
into conjunctive normal
form.  We construct a truth table for
0
i
by evaluating all possible assignments to
its variables.  Each row of the truth table consists of a possible assignment of the
variables of the clause, together with the value of the clause under that assignment.
Using the truth-table entries that evaluate to0, we build a formula indisjunctive
normal form(orDNF)—an OR of ANDs—that is equivalent  to:
0
i
.Wethen
negate this formula and convert it into a CNF formula
00
i
by usingDeMorgan’s

1084Chapter 34NP-Completeness
y
1
y
2
x
2
.y
1
$.y
2
^:x
2
//
1110
110
1
101
0
100
0
011
1
010
0
001
1
000
1
Figure 34.12The truth table for the clause.y
1
$.y
2
^:x
2
//.
lawsfor propositional logic,
:.a^b/D:a_:b;
:.a_b/D:a^:b;
to complement all literals, change ORsinto ANDs, and change ANDs into ORs.
In  our  example,  we convert  the  clause
0
1
D.y
1
$.y
2
^:x
2
//into  CNF
as  follows.   The  truth  table  for
0
1
appears  in  Figure  34.12.   The  DNF formula
equivalent to:
0
1
is
.y
1
^y
2
^x
2
/_.y
1
^:y
2
^x
2
/_.y
1
^:y
2
^:x
2
/_.:y
1
^y
2
^:x
2
/:
Negating and applying DeMorgan’s laws, we get the CNF formula

00
1
D.:y
1
_:y
2
_:x
2
/^.:y
1
_y
2
_:x
2
/
^.:y
1
_y
2
_x
2
/^.y
1
_:y
2
_x
2
/;
which is equivalent to the original clause
0
1
.
At this point, we have converted each clause
0
i
of the formula
0
into a CNF
formula
00
i
,  and  thus
0
is  equivalent  to  the  CNF formula
00
consisting  of  the
conjunction of the
00
i
. Moreover, each clause of
00
has at most3literals.
The third and final step of the reduction further transforms the formula so that
each clause hasexactly3distinct literals. We construct the final 3-CNF formula
000
from the clauses of the CNF formula
00
.  The formula
000
also uses two auxiliary
variables  that we shall  callpandq.   For each  clauseC
i
of
00
,  we include  the
following clauses in
000
:

IfC
i
has3distinct literals, then simply includeC
i
asaclauseof
000
.

IfC
i
has 2 distinct literals, that is, ifC
i
D.l
1
_l
2
/,wherel
1
andl
2
are literals,
then  include.l
1
_l
2
_p/^.l
1
_l
2
_:p/as  clauses  of
000
.   The  literals
pand:pmerely fulfill the syntactic requirement that each clause of
000
has

34.4NP-completeness proofs1085
exactly3distinct  literals.   WhetherpD0orpD1,  one of  the clauses  is
equivalent tol
1
_l
2
, and the other evaluates to1, which is the identity for AND.

IfC
i
has just1distinct literall, then include.l_p_q/^.l_p_:q/^
.l_:p_q/^.l_:p_:q/as clauses of
000
. Regardless of the values ofp
andq, one of the four clauses is equivalent tol, and the other3evaluate to1.
We can see that the 3-CNF formula
000
is satisfiable if and only ifis satisfiable
by inspecting each of the three steps.  Likethe reduction from CIRCUIT-SAT to
SAT,  the construction  of
0
fromin the first step preserves satisfiability.   The
second step produces a CNF formula
00
that is algebraically equivalent to
0
.The
third step produces a 3-CNF formula
000
that is effectively equivalent to
00
,since
any assignment to the variablespandqproduces a formula that is algebraically
equivalent to
00
.
We must also show that the reduction can be computed in polynomial time. Con-
structing
0
fromintroduces at most1variable and1clause per connective in.
Constructing
00
from
0
can introduce at most8clauses into
00
for each clause
from
0
,  since each clause of
0
has at most3variables,  and the truth table for
each clause has at most2
3
D8rows.  The construction of
000
from
00
introduces
at most4clauses into
000
for each clause of
00
.  Thus,  the size of the resulting
formula
000
is polynomial in the length of the original formula.  Each of the con-
structions can easily be accomplished in polynomial time.
Exercises
34.4-1
Consider the straightforward (nonpolynomial-time) reduction in the proof of The-
orem 34.9.  Describe a circuit of sizenthat, when converted to a formula by this
method, yields a formula whose size is exponential inn.
34.4-2
Show the 3-CNF formula that results when we use the method of Theorem 34.10
on the formula (34.3).
34.4-3
Professor  Jagger  proposes  to show that  SAT
P
3-CNF-SAT by using  only the
truth-table technique in the proof of Theorem 34.10, and not the other steps.  That
is,  the  professor  proposes  to take  the boolean  formula,  form  a truth  table  for
its  variables,  derive  from  the  truth  table  a  formula  in  3-DNF  that  is  equivalent
to:, and then negate and apply DeMorgan’s laws to produce a 3-CNF formula
equivalent to. Show that this strategy does not yield a polynomial-time reduction.

1086Chapter 34NP-Completeness
34.4-4
Show that the problem of determining whether a boolean formula is a tautology is
complete for co-NP. (Hint:See Exercise 34.3-7.)
34.4-5
Show that the problem of determining the satisfiability of boolean formulas in dis-
junctive normal form is polynomial-time solvable.
34.4-6
Suppose that someone gives you a polynomial-time  algorithm to decide formula
satisfiability.  Describe how to use this algorithm to find satisfying assignments in
polynomial time.
34.4-7
Let 2-CNF-SAT be the set of satisfiable boolean formulas in CNF with exactly 2
literals per clause. Show that 2-CNF-SAT2P. Make your algorithm as efficient as
possible. (Hint:Observe thatx_yis equivalent to:x!y. Reduce 2-CNF-SAT
to an efficiently solvable problem on a directed graph.)
34.5  NP-complete problems
NP-complete problems arise in diverse domains: boolean logic, graphs, arithmetic,
network design, sets and partitions, storage and retrieval, sequencing and schedul-
ing, mathematical programming, algebra and number theory, games and puzzles,
automata and language theory, program optimization, biology, chemistry, physics,
and more.  In this section, we shall use the reduction methodology to provide NP-
completeness  proofs for a variety of problems drawn from graph theory and set
partitioning.
Figure 34.13 outlines the structure of the NP-completeness proofs in this section
and  Section  34.4.   We prove each  language  in  the figure  to be  NP-complete  by
reduction from the language that points to it.  At the root is CIRCUIT-SAT, which
we proved NP-complete in Theorem 34.7.
34.5.1  The clique problem
Acliquein an undirected graphGD.V; E/is a subsetV
0
Vof vertices, each
pair of which is connected by an edge inE. In other words, a clique is a complete
subgraph  ofG.Thesizeof a clique  is the number  of vertices  it  contains.   The
clique problemis the optimization problem of finding a clique of maximum size in

34.5NP-complete problems1087
CIRCUIT-SAT
SAT
3-CNF-SAT
CLIQUE
VERTEX-COVER
SUBSET-SUM
HAM-CYCLE
TSP
Figure 34.13The structure of NP-completeness proofs in Sections 34.4 and 34.5.  All proofs ulti-
mately follow by reduction from the NP-completeness of CIRCUIT-SAT.
a graph.  As a decision problem, we ask simply whether a clique of a given sizek
exists in the graph. The formal definition is
CLIQUED
f
hG; kiWGis a graph containing a clique of sizek
g
:
A naive algorithm for determining whether a graphGD.V; E/with
j
V
j
ver-
tices  has  a clique  of  sizekis to list  allk-subsets  ofV,  and check  each  one  to
see whether it forms a clique.  The running time of this algorithm is.k
2

jVj
k

/,
which is polynomial ifkis a constant. In general, however,kcould be near
j
V
j
=2,
in which  case  the  algorithm  runs  in  superpolynomial  time.   Indeed,  an  efficient
algorithm for the clique problem is unlikely to exist.
Theorem 34.11
The clique problem is NP-complete.
ProofTo show that CLIQUE2NP, for a given graphGD.V; E/,weusethe
setV
0
Vof vertices in the clique as a certificate forG. We can check whetherV
0
is a clique in polynomial time by checking whether, for each pairu; 2V
0
,the
edge.u; /belongs toE.
We next prove that 3-CNF-SAT
P
CLIQUE, which shows that the clique prob-
lem is NP-hard.  You might be surprised that we should be able to prove such a
result, since on the surface logical formulas seem to have little to do with graphs.
The  reduction  algorithm  begins  with  an  instance  of  3-CNF-SAT.   LetD
C
1
^C
2
^^C
k
be  a  boolean  formula  in  3-CNF  withkclauses.   ForrD

1088Chapter 34NP-Completeness
x
1
x
1
x
2
x
2
x
3
x
3
:x
1
:x
2
:x
3
C
1
Dx
1
_:x
2
_:x
3
C
2
D:x
1
_x
2
_x
3
C
3
Dx
1
_x
2
_x
3
Figure 34.14The graphGderived from the 3-CNF formulaDC
1
^C
2
^C
3
,whereC
1
D
.x
1
_:x
2
_:x
3
/,C
2
D.:x
1
_x
2
_x
3
/,andC
3
D.x
1
_x
2
_x
3
/, in reducing 3-CNF-SAT to
CLIQUE.  A satisfying assignment of the formula hasx
2
D0,x
3
D1,andx
1
either0or1.This
assignment satisfiesC
1
with:x
2
, and it satisfiesC
2
andC
3
withx
3
, corresponding to the clique
with lightly shaded vertices.
1;2;:::;k, each clauseC
r
has exactly three distinct literalsl
r
1
,l
r
2
,andl
r
3
.Weshall
construct a graphGsuch thatis satisfiable if and only ifGhas a clique of sizek.
We  construct  the  graphGD.V; E/as  follows.For  each  clauseC
r
D
.l
r
1
_l
r
2
_l
r
3
/in, we place a triple of vertices
r
1
,
r
2
,and
r
3
intoV.  We put
an edge between two vertices
r
i
and
s
j
if both of the following hold:


r
i
and
s
j
are in different triples, that is,r¤s,and

their corresponding literals areconsistent,thatis,l
r
i
is not the negation ofl
s
j
.
We can easily build this graph fromin polynomial time.  As an example of this
construction, if we have
D.x
1
_:x
2
_:x
3
/^.:x
1
_x
2
_x
3
/^.x
1
_x
2
_x
3
/;
thenGis the graph shown in Figure 34.14.
We must show that this transformation ofintoGis a reduction. First, suppose
thathas  a  satisfying  assignment.   Then  each  clauseC
r
contains  at  least  one
literall
r
i
that is assigned1, and each such literal corresponds to a vertex
r
i
. Picking
one such “true” literal from each clause yields a setV
0
ofkvertices. We claim that
V
0
is a clique.  For any two vertices
r
i
;
s
j
2V
0
,wherer¤s, both corresponding
literalsl
r
i
andl
s
j
map to1by the given satisfying assignment, and thus the literals

34.5NP-complete problems1089
cannot be complements. Thus, by the construction ofG, the edge.
r
i
;
s
j
/belongs
toE.
Conversely, suppose thatGhas a cliqueV
0
of sizek.  No edges inGconnect
vertices in the same triple, and soV
0
contains exactly one vertex per triple. We can
assign1to each literall
r
i
such that
r
i
2V
0
without fear of assigning1to both a
literal and its complement, sinceGcontains no edges between inconsistent literals.
Each clause is satisfied, and sois satisfied. (Any variables that do not correspond
to a vertex in the clique may be set arbitrarily.)
In the example of Figure 34.14, a satisfying assignment ofhasx
2
D0and
x
3
D1. A corresponding clique of sizekD3consists of the vertices correspond-
ing to:x
2
from the first clause,x
3
from the second clause, andx
3
from the third
clause. Because the clique contains no vertices corresponding to eitherx
1
or:x
1
,
we can setx
1
to either0or1in this satisfying assignment.
Observe that in the proof of Theorem 34.11, we reduced an arbitrary instance
of 3-CNF-SAT to an instance of CLIQUE with a particular structure.  You might
think that we have shown only that CLIQUE is NP-hard in graphs in which the
vertices are restricted to occur in triples and in which there are no edges between
vertices in the same triple.  Indeed, we have shown that CLIQUE is NP-hard only
in this restricted case, but this proof suffices to show that CLIQUE is NP-hard in
general graphs. Why? If we had a polynomial-time algorithm that solved CLIQUE
on general graphs, it would also solve CLIQUE on restricted graphs.
The opposite approach—reducing instances of 3-CNF-SAT with a special struc-
ture to general  instances  of  CLIQUE—would not  have sufficed,  however.   Why
not?   Perhaps  the  instances  of  3-CNF-SAT  that  we  chose  to  reduce  from  were
“easy,” and so we would not have reduced an NP-hard problem to CLIQUE.
Observe also  that  the reduction  used the instance  of  3-CNF-SAT,  but  not  the
solution.   We  would  have  erred  if  the  polynomial-time  reduction  had  relied  on
knowing whether the formulais satisfiable, since we do not know how to decide
whetheris satisfiable in polynomial time.
34.5.2  The vertex-cover problem
Avertex coverof an undirected graphGD.V; E/is a subsetV
0
Vsuch that
if.u; /2E,thenu2V
0
or2V
0
(or both).  That is, each vertex “covers” its
incident edges, and a vertex cover forGis a set of vertices that covers all the edges
inE.Thesizeof a vertex cover is the number of vertices in it.  For example, the
graph in Figure 34.15(b) has a vertex cover
f
w;  ́
g
of size2.
Thevertex-cover problemis to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a given
graph.   Restating  this  optimization  problem  as  a  decision  problem,  we  wish  to

1090Chapter 34NP-Completeness
uv
yx
zw
(a)
uv
yx
zw
(b)
Figure 34.15Reducing CLIQUE to VERTEX-COVER.(a)An undirected graphGD.V; E/with
cliqueV
0
D
f
u; ; x; y
g
.(b)The graphGproduced by the reduction algorithm that has vertex cover
VV
0
D
f
w;  ́
g
.
determine whether a graph has a vertex cover of a given sizek. As a language, we
define
VERTEX-COVERD
f
hG; kiWgraphGhas a vertex cover of sizek
g
:
The following theorem shows that this problem is NP-complete.
Theorem 34.12
The vertex-cover problem is NP-complete.
ProofWe first show that VERTEX-COVER2NP. Suppose we are given a graph
GD.V; E/and an integerk. The certificate we choose is the vertex coverV
0
V
itself. The verification algorithm affirms that
j
V
0
j
Dk, and then it checks, for each
edge.u; /2E,thatu2V
0
or2V
0
.  We can easily verify the certificate in
polynomial time.
We prove that the vertex-cover problem is NP-hard by showing that CLIQUE
P
VERTEX-COVER.  This reduction relies on the notion of the “complement” of a
graph.  Given an undirected graphGD.V; E/,wedefinethecomplementofG
as
GD.V;E/,whereED
f
.u; /Wu; 2V; u¤;and.u; /62E
g
.Inother
words,
Gis the graph containing exactly those edges that are not inG. Figure 34.15
shows a graph and its complement and illustrates the reduction from CLIQUE to
VERTEX-COVER.
The reduction algorithm takes as input an instancehG; kiof the clique problem.
It computes the complement
G, which we can easily do in polynomial time.  The
output of the reduction algorithm is the instanceh
G;
j
V
j
kiof the vertex-cover
problem.   To  complete  the  proof,  we  show  that  this  transformation  is  indeed  a

34.5NP-complete problems1091
reduction: the graphGhas a clique of sizekif and only if the graphGhasavertex
cover of size
j
V
j
k.
Suppose thatGhas a cliqueV
0
Vwith
j
V
0
j
Dk. We claim thatVV
0
is a
vertex cover in
G.Let.u; /be any edge inE.  Then,.u; /62E, which implies
that at least one ofuordoes not belong toV
0
, since every pair of vertices inV
0
is
connected by an edge ofE. Equivalently, at least one ofuoris inVV
0
,which
means that edge.u; /is covered byVV
0
.Since.u; /was chosen arbitrarily
from
E, every edge ofEis covered by a vertex inVV
0
. Hence, the setVV
0
,
which has size
j
V
j
k, forms a vertex cover for
G.
Conversely, suppose that
Ghas a vertex coverV
0
V,where
j
V
0
j
D
j
V
j
k.
Then,  for  allu; 2V,if.u; /2
E,thenu2V
0
or2V
0
or  both.   The
contrapositive of this implication is that for allu; 2V,ifu62V
0
and62V
0
,
then.u; /2E. In other words,VV
0
is a clique, and it has size
j
V
j

j
V
0
j
Dk.
Since VERTEX-COVER is NP-complete, we don’t expect to find a polynomial-
time algorithm for finding a minimum-size vertex cover.  Section 35.1 presents a
polynomial-time “approximation algorithm,” however, which produces “approxi-
mate” solutions for the vertex-cover problem. The size of a vertex cover produced
by the algorithm is at most twice the minimum size of a vertex cover.
Thus, we shouldn’t  give up hope just because a problem is NP-complete.  We
may  be  able  to  design  a  polynomial-time  approximation  algorithm  that  obtains
near-optimal  solutions,  even though finding an optimal solution is NP-complete.
Chapter 35 gives several approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems.
34.5.3  The hamiltonian-cycle problem
We now return to the hamiltonian-cycle problem defined in Section 34.2.
Theorem 34.13
The hamiltonian cycle problem is NP-complete.
ProofWe first show  that  HAM-CYCLE belongs  to  NP.   Given  a graphGD
.V; E/, our certificate is the sequence of
j
V
j
vertices that makes up the hamiltonian
cycle.  The verification algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex
inVexactly once and that with the first vertex repeated at the end, it forms a cycle
inG.   That  is,  it checks  that  there  is an edge between  each  pair  of  consecutive
vertices  and  between  the first and last  vertices.   We can verify  the certificate  in
polynomial time.
We  now  prove  that  VERTEX-COVER
P
HAM-CYCLE,  which  shows  that
HAM-CYCLE is NP-complete.Given an undirected  graphGD.V; E/and an

1092Chapter 34NP-Completeness
[u,v,1]
[u,v,2]
[u,v,3]
[u,v,4]
[u,v,5]
[u,v,6]
[v,u,1]
[v,u,2]
[v,u,3]
[v,u,4]
[v,u,5]
[v,u,6]
W
uv
(a)
W
uv
(b)
[u,v,1]
[u,v,6]
[v,u,1]
[v,u,6]
W
uv
(c)
[u,v,1]
[u,v,6]
[v,u,1]
[v,u,6]
W
uv
(d)
[u,v,1]
[u,v,6]
[v,u,1]
[v,u,6]
Figure 34.16The widget used in reducing the vertex-cover problem to the hamiltonian-cycle prob-
lem. An edge.u; /of graphGcorresponds to widgetW
u
in the graphG
0
created in the reduction.
(a)The widget, with individual vertices labeled.(b)–(d)The shaded paths are the only possible ones
through the widget that include all vertices, assuming that the only connections from the widget to
the remainder ofG
0
are through verticesŒu; ; 1,Œu; ; 6,Œ; u; 1,andŒ; u; 6.
integerk, we construct an undirected graphG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/that has a hamiltonian
cycle if and only ifGhas a vertex cover of sizek.
Our construction uses awidget, which is a piece of a graph that enforces certain
properties. Figure 34.16(a) shows the widget we use. For each edge.u; /2E,the
graphG
0
that we construct will contain one copy of this widget, which we denote
byW
u
. We denote each vertex inW
u
byŒu;;iorŒ;u;i,where1i6,so
that each widgetW
u
contains12vertices. WidgetW
u
also contains the14edges
shown in Figure 34.16(a).
Along with the internal  structure  of the widget,  we enforce  the properties  we
want  by  limiting  the  connections  between  the  widget  and  the  remainder  of  the
graphG
0
that we construct.  In particular, only verticesŒu;;1,Œu;;6,Œ;u;1,
andŒ;u;6will have edges incident  from outsideW
u
.  Any hamiltonian  cycle
ofG
0
must  traverse  the  edges  ofW
u
in  one  of  the  three  ways  shown  in  Fig-
ures 34.16(b)–(d).  If the cycle enters through vertexŒu;;1, it must exit through
vertexŒu;;6, and it either visits all12of the widget’s vertices (Figure 34.16(b))
or the six verticesŒu;;1throughŒu;;6(Figure 34.16(c)).  In the latter case,
the cycle will have to reenter the widget to visit verticesŒ;u;1throughŒ;u;6.
Similarly,  if  the  cycle  enters  through  vertexŒ;u;1,  it  must  exit  through  ver-
texŒ;u;6, and it either visits all12of the widget’s vertices (Figure 34.16(d)) or
the six verticesŒ;u;1throughŒ;u;6(Figure 34.16(c)). No other paths through
the widget that visit all12vertices are possible.  In particular,  it is impossible to
construct two vertex-disjoint paths, one of which connectsŒu;;1toŒ;u;6and
the other of which connectsŒ;u;1toŒu;;6, such that the union of the two paths
contains all of the widget’s vertices.

34.5NP-complete problems1093
[w,x,1]
[w,x,6]
[x,w,1]
[x,w,6]
W
wx
(b)
[x,y,1]
[x,y,6]
[y,x,1]
[y,x,6]
W
xy
[w,y,1]
[w,y,6]
[y,w,1]
[y,w,6]
W
wy
[w,z,1]
[w,z,6]
[z,w,1]
[z,w,6]
W
wz
s
1
s
2
wx
zy
(a)
Figure 34.17Reducing an instance of the vertex-cover problem to an instance of the hamiltonian-
cycle problem.(a)An undirected graphGwith a vertex cover of size2, consisting of the lightly
shaded verticeswandy.(b)The undirected graphG
0
produced by the reduction, with the hamilto-
nian path corresponding to the vertex cover shaded.  The vertex cover
f
w; y
g
corresponds to edges
.s
1
;Œw;x;1/and.s
2
;Œy;x;1/appearing in the hamiltonian cycle.
The only other vertices inV
0
other than those of widgets areselector vertices
s
1
;s
2
;:::;s
k
.   We  use  edges  incident  on  selector  vertices  inG
0
to  select  thek
vertices of the cover inG.
In addition to the edges in widgets,E
0
contains two other types of edges, which
Figure  34.17  shows.   First,  for  each  vertexu2V,  we add  edges  to  join  pairs
of widgets in order to form a path containing all widgets corresponding to edges
incident  onuinG.    We  arbitrarily  order  the  vertices  adjacent  to  each  vertex
u2Vasu
.1/
;u
.2/
;:::;u
.degree.u//
,  where  degree.u/is  the  number  of  vertices
adjacent  tou.    We  create  a  path  inG
0
through  all  the  widgets  corresponding
to  edges  incident  onuby  adding  toE
0
the  edgesf.Œu; u
.i /
; 6; Œu; u
.iC1/
;1/W
1idegree.u/1g.  In Figure 34.17, for example, we order the vertices ad-
jacent towasx; y;  ́, and so graphG
0
in part (b) of the figure includes the edges

1094Chapter 34NP-Completeness
.Œw; x; 6; Œw; y; 1/and.Œw; y; 6; Œw;  ́; 1/.  For each vertexu2V, these edges
inG
0
fill in a path containing  all  widgets  corresponding  to edges  incident  onu
inG.
The intuition behind these edges is that if we choose a vertexu2Vin the vertex
cover ofG, we can construct a path fromŒu; u
.1/
;1toŒu; u
.degree.u//
;6inG
0
that
“covers” all widgets corresponding to edges incident onu. That is, for each of these
widgets, sayW
u;u
.i /
, the path either includes all12vertices (ifuis in the vertex
cover butu
.i /
is not) or just the six verticesŒu; u
.i /
; 1; Œu; u
.i /
;2;:::;Œu;u
.i /
;6(if
bothuandu
.i /
are in the vertex cover).
The final type of edge inE
0
joins the first vertexŒu; u
.1/
;1and the last vertex
Œu; u
.degree.u//
;6of each of these paths to each of the selector vertices.  That is, we
include the edges
f.s
j
;Œu;u
.1/
;1/Wu2Vand1jkg
[f.s
j
;Œu;u
.degree.u//
;6/Wu2Vand1jkg:
Next, we show that the size ofG
0
is polynomial in the size ofG, and hence we
can constructG
0
in time polynomial in the size ofG. The vertices ofG
0
are those
in the widgets, plus the selector vertices. With12vertices per widget, plusk
j
V
j
selector vertices, we have a total of
j
V
0
j
D12
j
E
j
Ck
12
j
E
j
C
j
V
j
vertices.  The edges ofG
0
are those in the widgets, those that go between widgets,
and those connecting selector vertices to widgets.  Each widget contains14edges,
totaling14
j
E
j
in all widgets. For each vertexu2V,graphG
0
has degree.u/1
edges going between widgets, so that summed over all vertices inV,
X
u2V
.degree.u/1/D2
j
E
j

j
V
j
edges go between widgets.  Finally,G
0
has two edges for each pair consisting of a
selector vertex and a vertex ofV, totaling2k
j
V
j
such edges.  The total number of
edges ofG
0
is therefore
j
E
0
j
D.14
j
E
j
/C.2
j
E
j

j
V
j
/C.2k
j
V
j
/
D16
j
E
j
C.2k1/
j
V
j
16
j
E
j
C.2
j
V
j
1/
j
V
j
:
Now we show that the transformation from graphGtoG
0
is a reduction. That is,
we must show thatGhas a vertex cover of sizekif and only ifG
0
has a hamiltonian
cycle.

34.5NP-complete problems1095
Suppose  thatGD.V; E/hasavertexcoverV

Vof  sizek.Let
V

D
f
u
1
;u
2
;:::;u
k
g
.    As  Figure  34.17  shows,  we  form  a  hamiltonian  cy-
cle inG
0
by including  the following  edges
10
for each vertexu
j
2V

.   Include
edges
 ̊
.Œu
j
;u
.i /
j
; 6; Œu
j
;u
.iC1/
j
;1/W1idegree.u
j
/1


,  which  connect  all
widgets corresponding to edges incident onu
j
.  We also include the edges within
these widgets as Figures 34.16(b)–(d) show, depending on whether the edge is cov-
ered by one or two vertices inV

. The hamiltonian cycle also includes the edges
f.s
j
;Œu
j
;u
.1/
j
;1/W1jkg
[f.s
jC1
;Œu
j
;u
.degree.u
j
//
j
;6/W1jk1g
[f.s
1
;Œu
k
;u
.degree.u
k
//
k
;6/g:
By inspecting Figure 34.17, you can verify that these edges form a cycle. The cycle
starts ats
1
, visits all widgets corresponding to edges incident onu
1
, then visitss
2
,
visits all widgets corresponding to edges incident onu
2
, and so on, until it returns
tos
1
. The cycle visits each widget either once or twice, depending on whether one
or two vertices ofV

cover its corresponding edge.  BecauseV

is a vertex cover
forG, each edge inEis incident on some vertex inV

, and so the cycle visits each
vertex in each widget ofG
0
.  Because the cycle also visits every selector vertex, it
is hamiltonian.
Conversely, suppose thatG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/has a hamiltonian cycleCE
0
.We
claim that the set
V

Dfu2VW.s
j
;Œu;u
.1/
;1/2Cfor some1jkg(34.4)
is a vertex cover forG.  To see why, partitionCinto maximal paths that start at
some selector vertexs
i
, traverse an edge.s
i
;Œu;u
.1/
;1/for someu2V,andend
at a selector vertexs
j
without passing through any other selector vertex. Let us call
each such path a “cover path.”  From howG
0
is constructed, each cover path must
start at somes
i
, take the edge.s
i
;Œu;u
.1/
;1/for some vertexu2V, pass through
all the widgets corresponding to edges inEincident onu, and then end at some
selector vertexs
j
.  We refer to this cover path asp
u
, and by equation (34.4), we
putuintoV

.  Each widget visited byp
u
must beW
u
orW
u
for some2V.
For each widget visited byp
u
, its vertices are visited by either one or two cover
paths.  If they are visited by one cover path, then edge.u; /2Eis covered inG
by vertexu.  If two cover paths visit the widget,  then the other cover path must
bep

, which implies that2V

, and edge.u; /2Eis covered by bothuand.
10
Technically,  we define a cycle in terms of vertices  rather than edges  (see Section B.4).   In the
interest of clarity, we abuse notation here and define the hamiltonian cycle in terms of edges.

1096Chapter 34NP-Completeness
uv
xw
4
23
5
1
1
Figure 34.18An instance of the traveling-salesman problem. Shaded edges represent a minimum-
cost tour, with cost7.
Because each vertex in each widget is visited by some cover path, we see that each
edge inEis covered by some vertex inV

.
34.5.4  The traveling-salesman problem
In thetraveling-salesman problem,  which is closely  related  to the hamiltonian-
cycle problem, a salesman must visitncities. Modeling the problem as a complete
graph  withnvertices,  we  can  say  that  the  salesman  wishes  to  make  atour,or
hamiltonian cycle, visiting each city exactly once and finishing at the city he starts
from.  The salesman incurs a nonnegative integer costc.i; j /to travel from cityi
to cityj, and the salesman wishes to make the tour whose total cost is minimum,
where the total cost is the sum of the individual costs along the edges of the tour.
For example, in Figure 34.18, a minimum-cost tour ishu; w; ; x; ui, with cost7.
The formal language for the corresponding decision problem is
TSPDfhG; c; kiWGD.V; E/is a complete graph;
cis a function fromV	V!Z;
k2Z,and
Ghas a traveling-salesman tour with cost at mostkg:
The following theorem  shows that  a fast  algorithm  for the traveling-salesman
problem is unlikely to exist.
Theorem 34.14
The traveling-salesman problem is NP-complete.
ProofWe first show that TSP belongs to NP.  Given an instance of the problem,
we  use  as  a  certificate  the  sequence  ofnvertices  in  the  tour.   The  verification
algorithm checks that this sequence contains each vertex exactly once, sums up the
edge costs, and checks whether the sum is at mostk. This process can certainly be
done in polynomial time.

34.5NP-complete problems1097
To  prove  that  TSP  is  NP-hard,  we  show  that  HAM-CYCLE
P
TSP.   Let
GD.V; E/be an instance of HAM-CYCLE. We construct an instance of TSP as
follows. We form the complete graphG
0
D.V; E
0
/,whereE
0
Df.i; j /Wi; j2V
andi¤jg, and we define the cost functioncby
c.i; j /D
(
0if.i; j /2E;
1if.i; j /62E:
(Note that becauseGis undirected, it has no self-loops, and soc.; /D1for all
vertices2V.) The instance of TSP is thenhG
0
;c;0i, which we can easily create
in polynomial time.
We now show that graphGhas a hamiltonian cycle if and only if graphG
0
has a
tour of cost at most0. Suppose that graphGhas a hamiltonian cycleh. Each edge
inhbelongs toEand thus has cost0inG
0
.  Thus,his a tour inG
0
with cost0.
Conversely, suppose that graphG
0
has a tourh
0
of cost at most0.  Since the costs
of the edges inE
0
are0and1, the cost of tourh
0
is exactly0and each edge on the
tour must have cost0. Therefore,h
0
contains only edges inE. We conclude thath
0
is a hamiltonian cycle in graphG.
34.5.5  The subset-sum problem
We next consider an arithmetic NP-complete problem. In thesubset-sum problem,
we are given a finite setSof positive integers and an integertargett>0. We ask
whether  there  exists  a subsetS
0
Swhose  elements  sum  tot.   For  example,
ifSD
f
1; 2; 7; 14; 49; 98; 343; 686; 2409; 2793; 16808; 17206; 117705; 117993
g
andtD138457, then the subsetS
0
D
f
1; 2; 7; 98; 343; 686; 2409; 17206; 117705
g
is a solution.
As usual, we define the problem as a language:
SUBSET-SUMD
f
hS; tiWthere exists a subsetS
0
Ssuch thattD
P
s2S
0
s
g
:
As with any arithmetic problem, it is important to recall that our standard encoding
assumes that the input integers are coded in binary. With this assumption in mind,
we can show that the subset-sum problem is unlikely to have a fast algorithm.
Theorem 34.15
The subset-sum problem is NP-complete.
ProofTo show that SUBSET-SUM is in NP, for an instancehS;tiof the problem,
we let the subsetS
0
be the certificate.  A verification algorithm can check whether
tD
P
s2S
0
sin polynomial time.
We now show that 3-CNF-SAT
P
SUBSET-SUM.  Given a 3-CNF formula
over variablesx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
with clausesC
1
;C
2
;:::;C
k
, each containing exactly

1098Chapter 34NP-Completeness
three distinct literals, the reduction algorithm constructs an instancehS; tiof the
subset-sum  problem such thatis satisfiable if and only if there exists a subset
ofSwhose sum is exactlyt. Without loss of generality, we make two simplifying
assumptions about the formula.  First, no clause contains both a variable and its
negation, for such a clause is automatically satisfied by any assignment of values
to the variables.  Second, each variable appears in at least one clause, because it
does not matter what value is assigned to a variable that appears in no clauses.
The reduction creates two numbers in setSfor each variablex
i
and two numbers
inSfor each clauseC
j
.  We shall create numbers in base10, where each number
containsnCkdigits and each digit corresponds to either one variable or one clause.
Base10(and other bases, as we shall see) has the property we need of preventing
carries from lower digits to higher digits.
As Figure 34.19 shows,  we construct  setSand targettas follows.  We label
each digit position by either a variable or a clause. The least significantkdigits are
labeled by the clauses, and the most significantndigits are labeled by variables.

The targetthas a1in each digit labeled by a variable and a4in each digit
labeled by a clause.

For each variablex
i
, setScontains two integers
i
and
0
i
.  Each of
i
and
0
i
has a1in the digit labeled byx
i
and0s in the other variable digits. If literalx
i
appears  in clauseC
j
,  then  the digit  labeled  byC
j
in
i
contains  a1.   If lit-
eral:x
i
appears in clauseC
j
, then the digit labeled byC
j
in
0
i
contains a1.
All other digits labeled by clauses in
i
and
0
i
are0.
All
i
and
0
i
values in setSare unique. Why? Forl¤i,no
l
or
0
l
values can
equal
i
and
0
i
in the most significantndigits. Furthermore, by our simplifying
assumptions above, no
i
and
0
i
can be equal in allkleast significant digits.
If
i
and
0
i
were equal, thenx
i
and:x
i
would have to appear in exactly the
same set of clauses.  But we assume that no clause contains bothx
i
and:x
i
and that eitherx
i
or:x
i
appears in some clause,  and so there must be some
clauseC
j
for which
i
and
0
i
differ.

For each clauseC
j
, setScontains two integerss
j
ands
0
j
. Each ofs
j
ands
0
j
has
0s in all digits other than the one labeled byC
j
.Fors
j
, there is a1in theC
j
digit, ands
0
j
has a2in this digit. These integers are “slack variables,” which we
use to get each clause-labeled digit position to add to the target value of4.
Simple inspection of Figure 34.19 demonstrates that alls
j
ands
0
j
values inS
are unique in setS.
Note that the greatest sum of digits in any one digit position is6, which occurs in
the digits labeled by clauses (three1s from the
i
and
0
i
values, plus1and2from

34.5NP-complete problems1099
=1001001
=1000110
=0100001
=0101110
=0010011
=0011100
=0001000
=0002000
=0000100
=0000200
=0000010
=0000020
=0000001
=0000002
=1114444
x
1
x
2
x
3
C
1
C
2
C
3
C
4

1

0
1

2

0
2

3

0
3
s
1
s
0
1
s
2
s
0
2
s
3
s
0
3
s
4
s
0
4
t
Figure 34.19The reduction  of 3-CNF-SAT to SUBSET-SUM.   The  formula in 3-CNF  isD
C
1
^C
2
^C
3
^C
4
,whereC
1
D.x
1
_:x
2
_:x
3
/,C
2
D.:x
1
_:x
2
_:x
3
/,C
3
D.:x
1
_:x
2
_x
3
/,
andC
4
D.x
1
_x
2
_x
3
/.  A satisfying assignment ofishx
1
D0; x
2
D0; x
3
D1i.ThesetS
produced by the reduction consists of the base-10numbers shown; reading from top to bottom,SD
f
1001001; 1000110; 100001; 101110; 10011; 11100; 1000; 2000; 100; 200; 10; 20; 1; 2
g
.Thetargett
is1114444. The subsetS
0
Sis lightly shaded, and it contains
0
1
,
0
2
,and
3
, corresponding to the
satisfying assignment.  It also contains slack variabless
1
,s
0
1
,s
0
2
,s
3
,s
4
,ands
0
4
to achieve the target
value of4in the digits labeled byC
1
throughC
4
.
thes
j
ands
0
j
values).  Interpreting these numbers in base10, therefore, no carries
can occur from lower digits to higher digits.
11
We can perform the reduction in polynomial time.  The setScontains2nC2k
values, each of which hasnCkdigits, and the time to produce each digit is poly-
nomial innCk.ThetargetthasnCkdigits, and the reduction produces each in
constant time.
We now show that the 3-CNF formulais satisfiable if and only if there exists
a subsetS
0
Swhose sum ist. First, suppose thathas a satisfying assignment.
ForiD1;2;:::;n,ifx
i
D1in this assignment, then include
i
inS
0
. Otherwise,
include
0
i
.  In other words, we include inS
0
exactly the
i
and
0
i
values that cor-
11
In fact, any baseb,whereb7, would work.  The instance at the beginning of this subsection is
the setSand targettin Figure 34.19 interpreted in base7,withSlisted in sorted order.

1100Chapter 34NP-Completeness
respond to literals with the value1in the satisfying assignment.  Having included
either
i
or
0
i
,  but not  both,  for alli,  and having  put0in the digits labeled  by
variables in alls
j
ands
0
j
, we see that for each variable-labeled digit, the sum of the
values ofS
0
must be1, which matches those digits of the targett.  Because each
clause  is satisfied,  the clause contains  some literal  with the value1.   Therefore,
each digit labeled by a clause has at least one1contributed to its sum by a
i
or
0
i
value inS
0
. In fact,1,2,or3literals may be1in each clause, and so each clause-
labeled digit has a sum of1,2,or3from the
i
and
0
i
values inS
0
. In Figure 34.19
for example, literals:x
1
,:x
2
,andx
3
have the value1in a satisfying assignment.
Each of clausesC
1
andC
4
contains exactly one of these literals, and so together
0
1
,

0
2
,and
3
contribute1to the sum in the digits forC
1
andC
4
.ClauseC
2
contains
two of these literals, and
0
1
,
0
2
,and
3
contribute2to the sum in the digit forC
2
.
ClauseC
3
contains all three of these literals, and
0
1
,
0
2
,and
3
contribute3to the
sum in the digit forC
3
. We achieve the target of4in each digit labeled by clauseC
j
by including inS
0
the appropriate nonempty subset of slack variablesfs
j
;s
0
j
g.In
Figure 34.19,S
0
includess
1
,s
0
1
,s
0
2
,s
3
,s
4
,ands
0
4
. Since we have matched the target
in all digits of the sum, and no carries can occur, the values ofS
0
sum tot.
Now, suppose that there is a subsetS
0
Sthat sums tot.  The subsetS
0
must
include exactly one of
i
and
0
i
for eachiD1;2;:::;n, for otherwise the digits
labeled by variables would not sum to1.If
i
2S
0
, we setx
i
D1.  Otherwise,

0
i
2S
0
, and we setx
i
D0. We claim that every clauseC
j
,forjD1;2;:::;k,is
satisfied by this assignment. To prove this claim, note that to achieve a sum of4in
the digit labeled byC
j
, the subsetS
0
must include at least one
i
or
0
i
value that
has a 1 in the digit labeled byC
j
, since the contributions of the slack variabless
j
ands
0
j
together sum to at most3.IfS
0
includes a
i
that has a 1 inC
j
’s position,
then the literalx
i
appears in clauseC
j
.  Since we have setx
i
D1when
i
2S
0
,
clauseC
j
is satisfied.   IfS
0
includes  a
0
i
that  has a 1 in that  position,  then the
literal:x
i
appears inC
j
.  Since we have setx
i
D0when
0
i
2S
0
,clauseC
j
is
again satisfied. Thus, all clauses ofare satisfied, which completes the proof.
Exercises
34.5-1
Thesubgraph-isomorphism problemtakes two undirected graphsG
1
andG
2
,and
it asks whetherG
1
is isomorphic to a subgraph ofG
2
.  Show that the subgraph-
isomorphism problem is NP-complete.
34.5-2
Givenanintegerm	nmatrixAand  an  integerm-vectorb,the0-1 integer-
programming problemasks whether there exists an integern-vectorxwith ele-

Problems for Chapter 341101
ments in the set
f
0; 1
g
such thatAxb.  Prove that 0-1 integer programming is
NP-complete. (Hint:Reduce from 3-CNF-SAT.)
34.5-3
Theinteger linear-programming problemis  like  the  0-1  integer-programming
problem given in Exercise 34.5-2,  except that the values of the vectorxmay be
any integers rather than just0or1.  Assuming that the 0-1 integer-programming
problem  is  NP-hard,  show  that  the  integer  linear-programming  problem  is  NP-
complete.
34.5-4
Show how to solve the subset-sum problem in polynomial time if the target valuet
is expressed in unary.
34.5-5
Theset-partition problemtakes  as  input  a  setSof  numbers.   The  question  is
whether  the  numbers  can  be partitioned  into  two setsAand
ADSAsuch
that
P
x2A
xD
P
x2A
x. Show that the set-partition problem is NP-complete.
34.5-6
Show that the hamiltonian-path problem is NP-complete.
34.5-7
Thelongest-simple-cycle problemis the problem  of determining  a simple cycle
(no repeated vertices) of maximum length in a graph. Formulate a related decision
problem, and show that the decision problem is NP-complete.
34.5-8
In thehalf 3-CNF satisfiabilityproblem, we are given a 3-CNF formulawithn
variables andmclauses,  wheremis even.  We wish to determine whether there
exists a truth assignment  to the variables ofsuch that exactly half the clauses
evaluate to0and exactly half the clauses evaluate to1.  Prove that the half 3-CNF
satisfiability problem is NP-complete.
Problems
34-1  Independent set
Anindependent setof a graphGD.V; E/isasubsetV
0
Vof vertices such
that each edge inEis incident on at most one vertex inV
0
.Theindependent-set
problemis to find a maximum-size independent set inG.

1102Chapter 34NP-Completeness
a.Formulate  a  related  decision  problem  for  the  independent-set  problem,  and
prove that it is NP-complete. (Hint:Reduce from the clique problem.)
b.Suppose that you are given a “black-box” subroutine to solve the decision prob-
lem you defined in part (a). Give an algorithm to find an independent set of max-
imum size.  The running time of your algorithm should be polynomial in
j
V
j
and
j
E
j
, counting queries to the black box as a single step.
Although  the  independent-set  decision  problem  is  NP-complete,  certain  special
cases are polynomial-time solvable.
c.Give an efficient algorithm to solve the independent-set problem when each ver-
tex inGhas degree2. Analyze the running time, and prove that your algorithm
works correctly.
d.Give an  efficient  algorithm  to solve  the  independent-set  problem  whenGis
bipartite.  Analyze the running time, and prove that your algorithm works cor-
rectly. (Hint:Use the results of Section 26.3.)
34-2  Bonnie and Clyde
Bonnie and Clyde have just robbed a bank.  They have a bag of money and want
to divide it up.  For each of the following scenarios, either give a polynomial-time
algorithm, or prove that the problem is NP-complete.  The input in each case is a
listofthenitems in the bag, along with the value of each.
a.The bag containsncoins, but only2different denominations:  some coins are
worthxdollars, and some are worthydollars. Bonnie and Clyde wish to divide
the money exactly evenly.
b.The bag containsncoins, with an arbitrary number of different denominations,
but each denomination  is a nonnegative integer power of2, i.e., the possible
denominations are1dollar,2dollars,4dollars, etc.  Bonnie and Clyde wish to
divide the money exactly evenly.
c.The bag containsnchecks, which are, in an amazing coincidence, made out to
“Bonnie or Clyde.”  They wish to divide the checks so that they each get the
exact same amount of money.
d.The bag containsnchecks as in part (c), but this time Bonnie and Clyde are
willing to accept a split in which the difference is no larger than100dollars.

Problems for Chapter 341103
34-3  Graph coloring
Mapmakers try to use as few colors as possible when coloring countries on a map,
as long as no two countries that share a border have the same color. We can model
this problem with an undirected  graphGD.V; E/in which each vertex repre-
sents a country and vertices whose respective countries share a border are adjacent.
Then, ak-coloringis a functioncWV!
f
1;2;:::;k
g
such thatc.u/¤c./for
every edge.u; /2E. In other words, the numbers1;2;:::;krepresent thekcol-
ors, and adjacent vertices must have different colors. Thegraph-coloring problem
is to determine the minimum number of colors needed to color a given graph.
a.Give an efficient algorithm to determine a2-coloring of a graph, if one exists.
b.Cast the graph-coloring problem as a decision problem.  Show that your deci-
sion problem is solvable in polynomial time if and only if the graph-coloring
problem is solvable in polynomial time.
c.Let the language 3-COLOR be the set of graphs that can be3-colored.  Show
that if 3-COLOR is NP-complete, then your decision problem from part (b) is
NP-complete.
To prove that 3-COLOR is NP-complete,  we use a reduction  from 3-CNF-SAT.
Given a formulaofmclauses onnvariablesx
1
,x
2
, ...,x
n
, we construct a graph
GD.V; E/as follows.  The setVconsists of a vertex for each variable, a vertex
for the negation of each variable,5vertices for each clause, and3special vertices:
TRUE,FALSE,andRED.  The edges of the graph are of two types:  “literal” edges
that are independent of the clauses and “clause” edges that depend on the clauses.
The literal edges form a triangle on the special vertices and also form a triangle on
x
i
,:x
i
,andREDforiD1;2;:::;n.
d.Argue that in any3-coloringcof a graph containing the literal edges, exactly
one of a variable and its negation is coloredc.
TRUE/and the other is colored
c.
FALSE/.  Argue that for any truth assignment for, there exists a3-coloring
of the graph containing just the literal edges.
The widget shown in Figure 34.20 helps to enforce the condition corresponding to
aclause.x_y_ ́/. Each clause requires a unique copy of the5vertices that are
heavily shaded in the figure; they connect as shown to the literals of the clause and
the special vertex
TRUE.
e.Argue that  if each ofx,y,and ́is coloredc.
TRUE/orc.FALSE/,  then the
widget is3-colorable if and only if at least one ofx,y,or ́is coloredc.
TRUE/.
f.Complete the proof that 3-COLOR is NP-complete.

1104Chapter 34NP-Completeness
x
y
z
TRUE
Figure 34.20The widget corresponding to a clause.x_y_ ́/, used in Problem 34-3.
34-4  Scheduling with profits and deadlines
Suppose  that  we have  one  machine  and  a  set  ofntasksa
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
,  each  of
which requires  time on the machine.   Each taska
j
requirest
j
time units on the
machine (its processing  time),  yields a profit ofp
j
, and has a deadlined
j
.The
machine can process only one task at a time, and taska
j
must run without inter-
ruption fort
j
consecutive time units. If we complete taska
j
by its deadlined
j
,we
receive a profitp
j
, but if we complete it after its deadline, we receive no profit. As
an optimization problem, we are given the processing times, profits, and deadlines
for a set ofntasks, and we wish to find a schedule that completes all the tasks and
returns the greatest amount of profit.  The processing times, profits, and deadlines
are all nonnegative numbers.
a.State this problem as a decision problem.
b.Show that the decision problem is NP-complete.
c.Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the decision problem, assuming that all
processing times are integers from1ton.(Hint:Use dynamic programming.)
d.Give a polynomial-time algorithm for the optimization problem, assuming that
all processing times are integers from1ton.
Chapter notes
The book by Garey and Johnson [129] provides a wonderful guide to NP-complete-
ness, discussing the theory at length and providing a catalogue of many problems
that  were  known  to  be  NP-complete  in  1979.   The  proof  of  Theorem  34.13  is
adapted from their book, and the list of NP-complete problem domains at the begin-
ning of Section 34.5 is drawn from their table of contents.  Johnson wrote a series

Notes for Chapter 341105
of 23 columns in theJournal of Algorithmsbetween 1981 and 1992 reporting new
developments in NP-completeness.  Hopcroft, Motwani, and Ullman [177], Lewis
and Papadimitriou [236], Papadimitriou [270], and Sipser [317] have good treat-
ments of NP-completeness in the context of complexity theory.  NP-completeness
and several  reductions  also appear  in books by Aho,  Hopcroft,  and Ullman [5];
Dasgupta,  Papadimitriou,  and  Vazirani  [82];  Johnsonbaugh  and  Schaefer  [193];
and Kleinberg and Tardos [208].
The class P was introduced in 1964 by Cobham [72] and, independently, in 1965
by Edmonds [100], who also introduced the class NP and conjectured that P¤NP.
The notion  of NP-completeness  was proposed  in 1971 by Cook [75],  who gave
the first NP-completeness proofs for formula satisfiability and 3-CNF satisfiabil-
ity.  Levin [234] independently discovered the notion, giving an NP-completeness
proof for a tiling problem.  Karp [199] introduced the methodology of reductions
in 1972 and demonstrated the rich variety of NP-complete problems.  Karp’s pa-
per included the original NP-completeness proofs of the clique, vertex-cover, and
hamiltonian-cycle problems.  Since then, thousands of problems have been proven
to be NP-complete by many researchers.  In a talk at a meeting celebrating Karp’s
60th birthday in 1995, Papadimitriou remarked, “about 6000 papers each year have
the term ‘NP-complete’ on their title, abstract, or list of keywords.  This is more
than each of the terms ‘compiler,’ ‘database,’ ‘expert,’ ‘neural network,’ or ‘oper-
ating system.’ ”
Recent work in complexity theory has shed light on the complexity of computing
approximate solutions.  This work gives a new definition of NP using “probabilis-
tically checkable proofs.”  This new definition implies that for problems such as
clique, vertex cover, the traveling-salesman  problem with the triangle inequality,
and many others, computing good approximate solutions is NP-hard and hence no
easier than computing optimal solutions. An introduction to this area can be found
in Arora’s thesis [20]; a chapter by Arora and Lund in Hochbaum [172]; a survey
article  by Arora  [21];  a book  edited  by Mayr,  Pr  ̈omel,  and  Steger  [246];  and  a
survey article by Johnson [191].

35Approximation Algorithms
Many problems of practical significance are NP-complete, yet they are too impor-
tant to abandon merely because we don’t know how to find an optimal solution in
polynomial time. Even if a problem is NP-complete, there may be hope. We have at
least three ways to get around NP-completeness. First, if the actual inputs are small,
an algorithm with exponential running time may be perfectly satisfactory. Second,
we may be able to isolate important special cases that we can solve in polynomial
time.  Third, we might come up with approaches to findnear-optimalsolutions in
polynomial time (either in the worst case or the expected case).  In practice, near-
optimality is often good enough.  We call an algorithm that returns near-optimal
solutions anapproximation algorithm. This chapter presents polynomial-time ap-
proximation algorithms for several NP-complete problems.
Performance ratios for approximation algorithms
Suppose that we are working on an optimization problem in which each potential
solution has a positive cost, and we wish to find a near-optimal solution. Depending
on the problem, we may define an optimal solution as one with maximum possi-
ble cost or one with minimum possible cost; that is, the problem may be either a
maximization or a minimization problem.
We say that an algorithm for a problem has anapproximation ratioof.n/if,
for any input  of sizen,  the costCof the solution produced  by the algorithm  is
within a factor of.n/of the costC

of an optimal solution:
max

C
C

;
C

C

.n/ :(35.1)
If an algorithm achieves an approximation ratio of.n/, we call it a.n/-approx-
imation algorithm.   The  definitions  of  the  approximation  ratio  and  of  a.n/-
approximation algorithm apply to both minimization and maximization problems.
For a maximization problem,0<CC

, and the ratioC

=Cgives the factor
by which the cost of an optimal solution is larger than the cost of the approximate

Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms1107
solution. Similarly, for a minimization problem,0<C

C, and the ratioC=C

gives the factor by which the cost of the approximate  solution is larger  than the
cost of an optimal  solution.   Because we assume that all solutions  have positive
cost, these ratios are always well defined.  The approximation ratio of an approx-
imation  algorithm  is  never  less  than1,sinceC=C

1impliesC

=C1.
Therefore, a1-approximation algorithm
1
produces an optimal solution, and an ap-
proximation algorithm with a large approximation ratio may return a solution that
is much worse than optimal.
For many problems,  we have polynomial-time  approximation  algorithms with
small constant approximation ratios, although for other problems, the best known
polynomial-time  approximation  algorithms  have  approximation  ratios  that  grow
as functions of the input sizen.  An example of such a problem is the set-cover
problem presented in Section 35.3.
Some NP-complete problems allow polynomial-time approximation algorithms
that can achieve increasingly better approximation ratios by using more and more
computation time.  That is, we can trade computation time for the quality of the
approximation.   An example is the subset-sum  problem  studied  in Section 35.5.
This situation is important enough to deserve a name of its own.
Anapproximation schemefor an optimization problem is an approximation al-
gorithm that takes as input not only an instance of the problem, but also a value
>0such that for any fixed, the scheme is a.1C/-approximation algorithm.
We say that an approximation scheme is apolynomial-time approximation scheme
if for any fixed>0, the scheme runs in time polynomial in the sizenof its input
instance.
The running time of a polynomial-time approximation scheme can increase very
rapidly asdecreases.  For example,  the running time of a polynomial-time ap-
proximation scheme might beO.n
2=
/. Ideally, ifdecreases by a constant factor,
the running time to achieve the desired approximation should not increase by more
than a constant factor (though not necessarily the same constant factor by which
decreased).
We say that an approximation scheme is afully polynomial-time approximation
schemeif  it  is  an  approximation  scheme  and  its  running  time  is  polynomial  in
both1=and the sizenof the input instance. For example, the scheme might have
a running time ofO..1=/
2
n
3
/. With such a scheme, any constant-factor decrease
incomes with a corresponding constant-factor increase in the running time.
1
When the approximation ratio is independent ofn, we use the terms “approximation ratio of”and
“-approximation algorithm,” indicating no dependence onn.

1108Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
Chapter outline
The first four sections of this chapter present some examples of polynomial-time
approximation algorithms for NP-complete problems, and the fifth section presents
a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme.  Section 35.1 begins with a study
of the vertex-cover  problem,  an NP-complete minimization  problem  that has an
approximation algorithm with an approximation ratio of2.  Section 35.2 presents
an approximation  algorithm with an approximation ratio of2for the case of the
traveling-salesman  problem  in  which  the  cost  function  satisfies  the  triangle  in-
equality.  It also shows that without the triangle inequality, for any constant1,
a-approximation  algorithm  cannot  exist  unless  PDNP.   In Section  35.3,  we
show how to use a greedy method as an effective approximation algorithm for the
set-covering  problem,  obtaining  a covering whose cost is at worst a logarithmic
factor larger than the optimal cost. Section 35.4 presents two more approximation
algorithms.   First we study  the  optimization  version  of  3-CNF satisfiability  and
give a simple randomized algorithm that produces a solution with an expected ap-
proximation ratio of8=7. Then we examine a weighted variant of the vertex-cover
problem and show how to use linear programming to develop a2-approximation
algorithm.  Finally, Section 35.5 presents a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme for the subset-sum problem.
35.1  The vertex-cover problem
Section 34.5.2 defined the vertex-cover problem and proved it NP-complete. Recall
that avertex coverof an undirected graphGD.V; E/isasubsetV
0
Vsuch
that if.u; /is an edge ofG, then eitheru2V
0
or2V
0
(or both). The size of a
vertex cover is the number of vertices in it.
Thevertex-cover problemis to find a vertex cover of minimum size in a given
undirected graph. We call such a vertex cover anoptimal vertex cover. This prob-
lem is the optimization version of an NP-complete decision problem.
Even though we don’t know how to find an optimal vertex cover in a graphG
in  polynomial  time,  we  can  efficiently  find  a  vertex  cover  that  is  near-optimal.
The following approximation algorithm takes as input an undirected graphGand
returns a vertex cover whose size is guaranteed to be no more than twice the size
of an optimal vertex cover.

35.1The vertex-cover problem1109
bcd
ae fg
(a)
bcd
ae fg
(b)
bcd
ae fg
(c)
bcd
ae fg
(d)
bcd
ae fg
(e)
bcd
ae fg
(f)
Figure 35.1The operation  of  APPROX-VERTEX-COVER.(a)The  input  graphG,  which has  7
vertices and 8 edges.(b)The edge.b; c/, shown heavy, is the first edge chosen by A
PPROX-VERTEX-
C
OVER. Verticesbandc, shown lightly shaded, are added to the setCcontaining the vertex cover
being created. Edges.a; b/,.c; e/,and.c; d /, shown dashed, are removed since they are now covered
by some vertex inC.(c)Edge.e; f /is chosen; verticeseandfare added toC.(d)Edge.d; g/
is chosen; verticesdandgare added toC.(e)The setC, which is the vertex cover produced by
A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVER, contains the six verticesb; c; d; e; f; g.(f)The optimal vertex cover for
this problem contains only three vertices:b,d,ande.
APPROX-VERTEX-COVER.G/
1CD;
2E
0
DG:E
3whileE
0
¤;
4let.u; /be an arbitrary edge ofE
0
5CDC[
f
u; 
g
6remove fromE
0
every edge incident on eitheruor
7returnC
Figure  35.1  illustrates  how  A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERoperates  on  an  example
graph.   The variableCcontains  the vertex cover being constructed.   Line 1 ini-
tializesCto the empty set.  Line 2 setsE
0
to be a copy of the edge setG:Eof
the graph.  The loop of lines 3–6 repeatedly picks an edge.u; /fromE
0
, adds its

1110Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
endpointsuandtoC, and deletes all edges inE
0
that are covered by eitheru
or. Finally, line 7 returns the vertex coverC. The running time of this algorithm
isO.VCE/, using adjacency lists to representE
0
.
Theorem 35.1
A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERis a polynomial-time2-approximation algorithm.
ProofWe have already  shown that  A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERruns in polyno-
mial time.
The setCof vertices that is returned by A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERis a vertex
cover, since the algorithm loops until every edge inG:Ehas been covered by some
vertex inC.
To see that A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERreturns a vertex cover that is at most twice
the size of an optimal cover, letAdenote the set of edges that line 4 of A
PPROX-
V
ERTEX-COVERpicked.  In order to cover the edges inA, any vertex cover—in
particular, an optimal coverC

—must include at least one endpoint of each edge
inA. No two edges inAshare an endpoint, since once an edge is picked in line 4,
all other edges that are incident on its endpoints are deleted fromE
0
in line 6. Thus,
no two edges inAare covered by the same vertex fromC

, and we have the lower
bound
j
C

j

j
A
j
(35.2)
on the size of an optimal vertex cover.  Each execution of line 4 picks an edge for
which neither of its endpoints is already inC, yielding an upper bound (an exact
upper bound, in fact) on the size of the vertex cover returned:
j
C
j
D2
j
A
j
:(35.3)
Combining equations (35.2) and (35.3), we obtain
j
C
j
D2
j
A
j
2
j
C

j
;
thereby proving the theorem.
Let us reflect on this proof.  At first,  you might wonder how we can possibly
prove that the size of the vertex cover returned by A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERis at
most twice the size of an optimal vertex cover, when we do not even know the size
of an optimal vertex cover.  Instead of requiring that we know the exact size of an
optimal vertex cover, we rely on a lower bound on the size. As Exercise 35.1-2 asks
you to show, the setAof edges that line 4 of A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERselects is
actually a maximal matching in the graphG.(Amaximal matchingis a matching
that is not a proper subset of any other matching.) The size of a maximal matching

35.2The traveling-salesman problem1111
is,  as we argued in the proof of Theorem 35.1,  a lower bound on the size of an
optimal vertex cover.  The algorithm returns a vertex cover whose size is at most
twice the size  of  the maximal  matchingA.   By relating  the  size of  the  solution
returned to the lower bound, we obtain our approximation ratio.  We will use this
methodology in later sections as well.
Exercises
35.1-1
Give an example of a graph for which A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERalways yields a
suboptimal solution.
35.1-2
Prove that the set of edges picked in line 4 of A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVERforms a
maximal matching in the graphG.
35.1-3?
Professor  B  ̈undchen  proposes  the  following  heuristic  to  solve  the  vertex-cover
problem.  Repeatedly select a vertex of highest  degree,  and remove all of its in-
cident edges. Give an example to show that the professor’s heuristic does not have
an approximation ratio of2.(Hint:Try a bipartite graph with vertices of uniform
degree on the left and vertices of varying degree on the right.)
35.1-4
Give an efficient greedy algorithm that finds an optimal vertex cover for a tree in
linear time.
35.1-5
From the proof of Theorem 34.12, we know that the vertex-cover problem and the
NP-complete clique problem are complementary in the sense that an optimal vertex
cover is the complement of a maximum-size clique in the complement graph. Does
this  relationship  imply  that  there  is  a polynomial-time  approximation  algorithm
with a constant approximation ratio for the clique problem? Justify your answer.
35.2  The traveling-salesman problem
In the  traveling-salesman  problem  introduced  in  Section  34.5.4,  we are  given  a
complete undirected graphGD.V; E/that has a nonnegative integer costc.u; /
associated  with each edge.u; /2E,  and we must find a hamiltonian cycle (a
tour) ofGwith minimum cost.  As an extension of our notation, letc.A/denote
the total cost of the edges in the subsetAE:

1112Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
c.A/D
X
.u;/2A
c.u; / :
In many practical situations, the least costly way to go from a placeuto a placew
is to go directly, with no intermediate steps.  Put another way, cutting out an inter-
mediate stop never increases the cost.  We formalize this notion by saying that the
cost functioncsatisfies thetriangle inequalityif, for all verticesu; ; w2V,
c.u; w/c.u; /Cc.; w/ :
The triangle inequality  seems as though it should naturally hold,  and it is au-
tomatically  satisfied  in several  applications.   For example,  if  the  vertices  of  the
graph are points in the plane and the cost of traveling between two vertices is the
ordinary euclidean distance between them, then the triangle inequality is satisfied.
Furthermore, many cost functions other than euclidean distance satisfy the triangle
inequality.
As Exercise 35.2-2 shows, the traveling-salesman problem is NP-complete even
if we require that the cost function satisfy the triangle inequality.  Thus, we should
not expect to find a polynomial-time  algorithm for solving this problem exactly.
Instead, we look for good approximation algorithms.
In Section 35.2.1,  we examine a2-approximation  algorithm  for the traveling-
salesman  problem  with the triangle  inequality.   In Section  35.2.2,  we show  that
without the triangle inequality, a polynomial-time approximation algorithm with a
constant approximation ratio does not exist unless PDNP.
35.2.1  The traveling-salesman problem with the triangle inequality
Applying the methodology of the previous section, we shall first compute a struc-
ture—a minimum spanning tree—whose weight gives a lower bound on the length
of an optimal traveling-salesman  tour.  We shall then use the minimum spanning
tree to create a tour whose cost is no more than twice that of the minimum spanning
tree’s weight, as long as the cost function satisfies the triangle inequality.  The fol-
lowing  algorithm  implements  this  approach,  calling  the minimum-spanning-tree
algorithm  MST-P
RIMfrom Section 23.2 as a subroutine.  The parameterGis a
complete undirected graph, and the cost functioncsatisfies the triangle inequality.
A
PPROX-TSP-TOUR.G; c/
1select a vertexr2G:Vto be a “root” vertex
2compute a minimum spanning treeTforGfrom rootr
using MST-P
RIM.G;c;r/
3letHbe a list of vertices, ordered according to when they are first visited
in a preorder tree walk ofT
4returnthe hamiltonian cycleH

35.2The traveling-salesman problem1113
(a)
ad
bf
e
g
c
h
(b)
ad
bf
e
g
c
h
(c)
ad
e
c
h
(d)
ad
bf
e
g
c
h
(e)
bfg
e
h
c
a
bfg
d
Figure 35.2The operation of APPROX-TSP-TOUR.(a)A complete undirected graph. Vertices lie
on intersections of integer grid lines. For example,fis one unit to the right and two units up fromh.
The cost function between two points is the ordinary euclidean distance.(b)A minimum spanning
treeTof the complete graph, as computed by MST-P
RIM.Vertexais the root vertex.  Only edges
in the minimum spanning tree are shown.  The vertices happen to be labeled in such a way that they
are added to the main tree by MST-P
RIMin alphabetical order.(c)AwalkofT, starting ata.A
full walk of the tree visits the vertices in the ordera; b; c; b; h; b; a; d; e; f; e; g; e; d; a.  A preorder
walk ofTlists a vertex just when it is first encountered, as indicated by the dot next to each vertex,
yielding the orderinga; b; c; h; d; e; f; g.(d)A tour obtained by visiting the vertices in the order
given by the preorder walk,  which is the tourHreturned by  A
PPROX-TSP-TOUR.  Its total cost
is approximately19:074.(e)An optimal tourH

for the original complete graph.  Its total cost is
approximately14:715.
Recall from Section 12.1 that a preorder tree walk recursively visits every vertex
in the tree, listing a vertex when it is first encountered,  before visiting any of its
children.
Figure 35.2 illustrates the operation of A
PPROX-TSP-TOUR. Part (a) of the fig-
ure shows a complete undirected graph, and part (b) shows the minimum spanning
treeTgrown from root vertexaby MST-P
RIM.  Part (c) shows how a preorder
walk ofTvisits the vertices, and part (d) displays the corresponding tour, which is
the tour returned by A
PPROX-TSP-TOUR. Part (e) displays an optimal tour, which
is about 23% shorter.

1114Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
By Exercise 23.2-2, even with a simple implementation of MST-PRIM, the run-
ning time of A
PPROX-TSP-TOURis‚.V
2
/. We now show that if the cost function
for an instance of the traveling-salesman problem satisfies the triangle inequality,
then A
PPROX-TSP-TOURreturns a tour whose cost is not more than twice the cost
of an optimal tour.
Theorem 35.2
A
PPROX-TSP-TOURis  a  polynomial-time2-approximation  algorithm  for  the
traveling-salesman problem with the triangle inequality.
ProofWe have already seen that A
PPROX-TSP-TOURruns in polynomial time.
LetH

denote an optimal tour for the given set of vertices. We obtain a spanning
tree by deleting any edge from a tour, and each edge cost is nonnegative. Therefore,
the weight of the minimum spanning treeTcomputed in line 2 of A
PPROX-TSP-
T
OURprovides a lower bound on the cost of an optimal tour:
c.T /c.H

/:(35.4)
Afull walkofTlists the vertices when they are first visited and also whenever
they are returned to after a visit to a subtree. Let us call this full walkW. The full
walk of our example gives the order
a; b; c; b; h; b; a; d; e; f; e; g; e; d; a :
Since the full walk traverses every edge ofTexactly twice, we have (extending
our definition of the costcin the natural manner to handle multisets of edges)
c.W /D2c.T / :(35.5)
Inequality (35.4) and equation (35.5) imply that
c.W /2c.H

/;(35.6)
and so the cost ofWis within a factor of2of the cost of an optimal tour.
Unfortunately, the full walkWis generally not a tour, since it visits some ver-
tices more than once.  By the triangle inequality, however, we can delete a visit to
any vertex fromWand the cost does not increase. (If we delete a vertexfromW
between visits touandw, the resulting ordering specifies going directly fromu
tow.)  By repeatedly applying this operation, we can remove fromWall but the
first visit to each vertex. In our example, this leaves the ordering
a; b; c; h; d; e; f; g :
This ordering is the same as that obtained by a preorder walk of the treeT.LetH
be the cycle corresponding to this preorder walk. It is a hamiltonian cycle, since ev-

35.2The traveling-salesman problem1115
ery vertex is visited exactly once, and in fact it is the cycle computed by APPROX-
TSP-T
OUR.SinceHis obtained by deleting vertices from the full walkW,we
have
c.H/c.W / :(35.7)
Combining inequalities (35.6) and (35.7) givesc.H/2c.H

/, which completes
the proof.
In spite of the nice approximation  ratio provided by Theorem 35.2,  APPROX-
TSP-T
OURis usually not the best practical choice for this problem. There are other
approximation algorithms that typically perform much better in practice.  (See the
references at the end of this chapter.)
35.2.2  The general traveling-salesman problem
If we drop the assumption that the cost functioncsatisfies the triangle inequality,
then we cannot find good approximate tours in polynomial time unless PDNP.
Theorem 35.3
If P¤NP, then for any constant1, there is no polynomial-time approximation
algorithm with approximation ratiofor the general traveling-salesman problem.
ProofThe proof is by contradiction. Suppose to the contrary that for some num-
ber1,  there is a polynomial-time  approximation  algorithmAwith approx-
imation  ratio.   Without  loss  of  generality,  we assume  thatis  an  integer,  by
rounding it up if necessary.  We shall then show how to useAto solve instances
of  the  hamiltonian-cycle  problem  (defined  in  Section  34.2)  in  polynomial  time.
Since Theorem 34.13 tells us that the hamiltonian-cycle problem is NP-complete,
Theorem 34.4 implies that if we can solve it in polynomial time, then PDNP.
LetGD.V; E/be an instance of the hamiltonian-cycle problem.  We wish to
determine  efficiently  whetherGcontains  a hamiltonian  cycle by making  use of
the hypothesized approximation algorithmA.WeturnGinto an instance of the
traveling-salesman problem as follows.  LetG
0
D.V; E
0
/be the complete graph
onV;thatis,
E
0
D
f
.u; /Wu; 2Vandu¤
g
:
Assign an integer cost to each edge inE
0
as follows:
c.u; /D
(
1if.u; /2E;

j
V
j
C1otherwise:
We can create representations ofG
0
andcfrom a representation ofGin time poly-
nomial in
j
V
j
and
j
E
j
.

1116Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
Now, consider the traveling-salesman problem.G
0
;c/.  If the original graphG
has a hamiltonian cycleH, then the cost functioncassigns to each edge ofHa
cost of1,andso.G
0
;c/contains a tour of cost
j
V
j
.  On the other hand, ifGdoes
not contain a hamiltonian cycle, then any tour ofG
0
must use some edge not inE.
But any tour that uses an edge not inEhas a cost of at least
.
j
V
j
C1/C.
j
V
j
1/D
j
V
j
C
j
V
j
>
j
V
j
:
Because edges not inGare so costly, there is a gap of at least
j
V
j
between the cost
of a tour that is a hamiltonian cycle inG(cost
j
V
j
) and the cost of any other tour
(cost at least
j
V
j
C
j
V
j
).  Therefore, the cost of a tour that is not a hamiltonian
cycle  inGis at  least  a factor  ofC1greater  than  the  cost  of  a tour  that  is  a
hamiltonian cycle inG.
Now,  suppose  that  we apply  the  approximation  algorithmAto  the  traveling-
salesman  problem.G
0
;c/.   BecauseAis guaranteed  to return  a tour  of  cost  no
more thantimes the cost of an optimal tour, ifGcontains a hamiltonian cycle,
thenAmust return it. IfGhas no hamiltonian cycle, thenAreturns a tour of cost
more than
j
V
j
. Therefore, we can useAto solve the hamiltonian-cycle problem
in polynomial time.
The  proof  of  Theorem  35.3  serves  as  an  example  of  a  general  technique  for
proving that we cannot approximate a problem very well.  Suppose that given an
NP-hard  problemX,  we  can  produce  in  polynomial  time  a  minimization  prob-
lemYsuch that “yes” instances ofXcorrespond to instances ofYwith value at
mostk(for somek), but that “no” instances ofXcorrespond  to instances ofY
with value greater thank. Then, we have shown that, unless PDNP, there is no
polynomial-time-approximation algorithm for problemY.
Exercises
35.2-1
Suppose that a complete undirected graphGD.V; E/with at least3vertices has
a cost functioncthat satisfies the triangle inequality. Prove thatc.u; /0for all
u; 2V.
35.2-2
Show  how  in  polynomial  time  we  can  transform  one  instance  of  the  traveling-
salesman problem into another instance whose cost function satisfies the triangle
inequality.  The two instances must have the same set of optimal tours.  Explain
why such a polynomial-time transformation does not contradict Theorem 35.3, as-
suming that P¤NP.

35.3The set-covering problem1117
35.2-3
Consider the followingclosest-point heuristicfor building  an approximate  trav-
eling-salesman  tour  whose  cost  function  satisfies  the  triangle  inequality.   Begin
with a trivial cycle consisting of a single arbitrarily chosen vertex.  At each step,
identify the vertexuthat is not on the cycle but whose distance to any vertex on the
cycle is minimum. Suppose that the vertex on the cycle that is nearestuis vertex.
Extend the cycle to includeuby insertingujust after.  Repeat until all vertices
are on the cycle. Prove that this heuristic returns a tour whose total cost is not more
than twice the cost of an optimal tour.
35.2-4
In thebottleneck traveling-salesman problem, we wish to find the hamiltonian cy-
cle that minimizes the cost of the most costly edge in the cycle. Assuming that the
cost function satisfies the triangle inequality, show that there exists a polynomial-
time approximation algorithm with approximation ratio3for this problem.  (Hint:
Show recursively that we can visit all the nodes in a bottleneck spanning tree, as
discussed in Problem 23-3, exactly once by taking a full walk of the tree and skip-
ping nodes, but without skipping more than two consecutive intermediate nodes.
Show that the costliest edge in a bottleneck spanning tree has a cost that is at most
the cost of the costliest edge in a bottleneck hamiltonian cycle.)
35.2-5
Suppose  that  the  vertices  for  an  instance  of  the  traveling-salesman  problem  are
points  in  the  plane  and  that  the  costc.u; /is  the  euclidean  distance  between
pointsuand. Show that an optimal tour never crosses itself.
35.3  The set-covering problem
The set-covering problem is an optimization problem that models many problems
that require resources to be allocated. Its corresponding decision problem general-
izes the NP-complete vertex-cover problem and is therefore also NP-hard. The ap-
proximation algorithm developed to handle the vertex-cover problem doesn’t apply
here, however, and so we need to try other approaches. We shall examine a simple
greedy heuristic with a logarithmic approximation ratio.  That is, as the size of the
instance gets larger, the size of the approximate solution may grow, relative to the
size of an optimal solution.  Because the logarithm function grows rather slowly,
however, this approximation algorithm may nonetheless give useful results.

1118Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
S
3
S
6
S
4
S
5
S
2
S
1
Figure 35.3An instance.X;F/of the set-covering problem,  whereXconsists of the12black
points andFD
f
S
1
;S
2
;S
3
;S
4
;S
5
;S
6
g
.  A minimum-size set cover isCD
f
S
3
;S
4
;S
5
g
,with
size3.   The greedy  algorithm produces  a cover  of size4by selecting either the setsS
1
,S
4
,S
5
,
andS
3
or the setsS
1
,S
4
,S
5
,andS
6
,inorder.
An instance.X;F/of theset-covering problemconsists of a finite setXand
a familyFof subsets ofX, such that every element ofXbelongs to at least one
subset inF:
XD
[
S2F
S:
We say that a subsetS2Fcoversits elements. The problem is to find a minimum-
size subsetCFwhose members cover all ofX:
XD
[
S2C
S:(35.8)
We say that anyCsatisfying equation (35.8)coversX.  Figure 35.3 illustrates the
set-covering problem.  The size ofCis the number of sets it contains, rather than
the number of individual elements in these sets, since every subsetCthat coversX
must contain all
j
X
j
individual elements.  In Figure 35.3, the minimum set cover
has size3.
The set-covering problem abstracts many commonly arising combinatorial prob-
lems. As a simple example, suppose thatXrepresents a set of skills that are needed
to solve a problem and that we have a given set of people available to work on the
problem.   We  wish  to  form  a  committee,  containing  as  few  people  as  possible,
such that for every requisite skill inX, at least one member of the committee has
that skill.  In the decision version of the set-covering problem, we ask whether a
covering exists with size at mostk,wherekis an additional parameter specified
in the problem instance.  The decision version of the problem is NP-complete, as
Exercise 35.3-2 asks you to show.

35.3The set-covering problem1119
A greedy approximation algorithm
The greedy method works by picking, at each stage, the setSthat covers the great-
est number of remaining elements that are uncovered.
G
REEDY-SET-COVER.X;F/
1UDX
2CD;
3whileU¤;
4select anS2Fthat maximizes
j
S\U
j
5UDUS
6CDC[
f
S
g
7returnC
In the example of Figure 35.3, G
REEDY-SET-COVERadds toC, in order, the sets
S
1
,S
4
,andS
5
, followed by eitherS
3
orS
6
.
The algorithm works as follows.  The setUcontains,  at each stage, the set of
remaining uncovered elements.  The setCcontains the cover being constructed.
Line4is the greedy decision-making step, choosing a subsetSthat covers as many
uncovered  elements  as  possible  (breaking  ties  arbitrarily).   AfterSis  selected,
line 5 removes its elements fromU, and line 6 placesSintoC. When the algorithm
terminates, the setCcontains a subfamily ofFthat coversX.
We can easily implement G
REEDY-SET-COVERto run in time polynomial in
j
X
j
and
j
F
j
.  Since the number of iterations of the loop on lines 3–6 is bounded from
above  by  min.
j
X
j
;
j
F
j
/,  and  we  can  implement  the  loop  body  to  run  in  time
O.
j
X
jj
F
j
/, a simple implementation runs in timeO.
j
X
jj
F
j
min.
j
X
j
;
j
F
j
//.Ex-
ercise 35.3-3 asks for a linear-time algorithm.
Analysis
We now show that the greedy algorithm returns a set cover that is not too much
larger than an optimal set cover. For convenience, in this chapter we denote thedth
harmonic numberH
d
D
P
d
iD1
1= i(see Section A.1) byH.d/.  As a boundary
condition, we defineH.0/D0.
Theorem 35.4
G
REEDY-SET-COVERis a polynomial-time.n/-approximation algorithm, where
.n/DH.max
fj
S
j
WS2F
g
/:
ProofWe  have  already  shown  that  G
REEDY-SET-COVERruns  in  polynomial
time.

1120Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
To show that GREEDY-SET-COVERis a.n/-approximation algorithm, we as-
sign  a  cost  of1to  each  set  selected  by  the  algorithm,  distribute  this  cost  over
the elements covered for the first time, and then use these costs to derive the de-
sired relationship between the size of an optimal set coverC

and the size of the
set coverCreturned  by the algorithm.  LetS
i
denote theith subset  selected by
G
REEDY-SET-COVER;  the algorithm incurs a cost of1when it addsS
i
toC.We
spread this cost of selectingS
i
evenly among the elements covered for the first time
byS
i
.Letc
x
denote the cost allocated to elementx, for eachx2X. Each element
is assigned a cost only once, when it is covered for the first time.  Ifxis covered
for the first time byS
i
,then
c
x
D
1
j
S
i
.S
1
[S
2
[[S
i1
/
j
:
Each step of the algorithm assigns1unit of cost, and so
j
C
j
D
X
x2X
c
x
:(35.9)
Each elementx2Xis in at least one set in the optimal coverC

, and so we have
X
S2C

X
x2S
c
x

X
x2X
c
x
:(35.10)
Combining equation (35.9) and inequality (35.10), we have that
j
C
j

X
S2C

X
x2S
c
x
:(35.11)
The remainder of the proof rests on the following key inequality, which we shall
prove shortly. For any setSbelonging to the familyF,
X
x2S
c
x
H.
j
S
j
/:(35.12)
From inequalities (35.11) and (35.12), it follows that
j
C
j

X
S2C

H.
j
S
j
/

j
C

j
H.max
fj
S
j
WS2F
g
/;
thus proving the theorem.
All that remains is to prove inequality (35.12). Consider any setS2Fand any
iD1;2;:::;
j
C
j
,andlet
u
i
D
j
S.S
1
[S
2
[[S
i
/
j
be  the  number  of  elements  inSthat  remain  uncovered  after  the  algorithm  has
selected  setsS
1
;S
2
;:::;S
i
.Wedefineu
0
D
j
S
j
to be the number of elements

35.3The set-covering problem1121
ofS, which are all initially uncovered.  Letkbe the least index such thatu
k
D0,
so that every element inSis covered by at least one of the setsS
1
;S
2
;:::;S
k
and
some element inSis uncovered byS
1
[S
2
[[S
k1
.  Then,u
i1
u
i
,and
u
i1
u
i
elements ofSare covered for the first time byS
i
,foriD1;2;:::;k.
Thus,
X
x2S
c
x
D
k
X
iD1
.u
i1
u
i
/
1
j
S
i
.S
1
[S
2
[[S
i1
/
j
:
Observe that
j
S
i
.S
1
[S
2
[[S
i1
/
j

j
S.S
1
[S
2
[[S
i1
/
j
Du
i1
;
because  the  greedy  choice  ofS
i
guarantees  thatScannot  cover  more  new  ele-
ments thanS
i
does (otherwise, the algorithm would have chosenSinstead ofS
i
).
Consequently, we obtain
X
x2S
c
x

k
X
iD1
.u
i1
u
i
/
1
u
i1
:
We now bound this quantity as follows:
X
x2S
c
x

k
X
iD1
.u
i1
u
i
/
1
u
i1
D
k
X
iD1
u
i1
X
jDu
i
C1
1
u
i1

k
X
iD1
u
i1
X
jDu
i
C1
1
j
(becauseju
i1
)
D
k
X
iD1
 
u
i1
X
jD1
1
j

u
i
X
jD1
1
j
!
D
k
X
iD1
.H.u
i1
/H.u
i
//
DH.u
0
/H.u
k
/(because the sum telescopes)
DH.u
0
/H.0/
DH.u
0
/(becauseH.0/D0)
DH.
j
S
j
/;
which completes the proof of inequality (35.12).

1122Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
Corollary 35.5
G
REEDY-SET-COVERis a polynomial-time.ln
j
X
j
C1/-approximation algorithm.
ProofUse inequality (A.14) and Theorem 35.4.
In some applications, max
fj
S
j
WS2F
g
is a small constant, and so the solution
returned  by  G
REEDY-SET-COVERis  at  most a  small constant  times  larger  than
optimal.   One  such  application  occurs  when  this  heuristic  finds  an  approximate
vertex cover for a graph whose vertices have degree at most 3.  In this case,  the
solution found by G
REEDY-SET-COVERis not more thanH.3/D11=6times as
large as an optimal solution,  a performance guarantee that is slightly better than
that of A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVER.
Exercises
35.3-1
Consider each of the following words as a set of letters:farid;dash;drain;
heard;lost;nose;shun;slate;snare;threadg.   Show which set  cover
G
REEDY-SET-COVERproduces when we break ties in favor of the word that ap-
pears first in the dictionary.
35.3-2
Show  that  the  decision  version  of  the  set-covering  problem  is  NP-complete  by
reducing it from the vertex-cover problem.
35.3-3
Show how to implement G
REEDY-SET-COVERin such a way that it runs in time
O

P
S2F
j
S
j

.
35.3-4
Show that the following weaker form of Theorem 35.4 is trivially true:
j
C
j

j
C

j
max
fj
S
j
WS2F
g
:
35.3-5
G
REEDY-SET-COVERcan  return  a number  of  different  solutions,  depending  on
how we break ties in line 4.  Give a procedure  B
AD-SET-COVER-INSTANCE.n/
that returns ann-element instance of the set-covering problem for which, depend-
ing on how we break ties in line 4, G
REEDY-SET-COVERcan return a number of
different solutions that is exponential inn.

35.4Randomization and linear programming1123
35.4  Randomization and linear programming
In this section, we study two useful techniques for designing approximation algo-
rithms: randomization and linear programming. We shall give a simple randomized
algorithm for an optimization version of 3-CNF satisfiability, and then we shall use
linear programming to help design an approximation algorithm for a weighted ver-
sion of the vertex-cover problem.  This section only scratches the surface of these
two powerful techniques.  The chapter notes give references for further  study of
these areas.
A randomized approximation algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability
Just as some randomized  algorithms compute exact solutions,  some randomized
algorithms compute approximate solutions.  We say that a randomized algorithm
for a problem has anapproximation ratioof.n/if, for any input of sizen,the
expectedcostCof the solution produced by the randomized algorithm is within a
factor of.n/of the costC

of an optimal solution:
max

C
C

;
C

C

.n/ :(35.13)
We call  a randomized  algorithm  that  achieves  an approximation  ratio  of.n/a
randomized.n/-approximation algorithm.In  other  words,  a  randomized  ap-
proximation algorithm is like a deterministic approximation algorithm, except that
the approximation ratio is for an expected cost.
A particular instance of 3-CNF satisfiability, as defined in Section 34.4, may or
may not be satisfiable. In order to be satisfiable, there must exist an assignment of
the variables so that every clause evaluates to1. If an instance is not satisfiable, we
may want to compute how “close” to satisfiable it is, that is, we may wish to find an
assignment of the variables that satisfies as many clauses as possible.  We call the
resulting maximization problemMAX-3-CNF satisfiability. The input to MAX-3-
CNF satisfiability is the same as for 3-CNF satisfiability, and the goal is to return
an assignment  of the variables that maximizes the number of clauses evaluating
to1.  We now show that randomly setting each variable to1with probability1=2
and to0with probability1=2yields a randomized8=7-approximation algorithm.
According to the definition of 3-CNF satisfiability from Section 34.4, we require
each  clause  to  consist  of  exactly  three  distinct  literals.   We  further  assume  that
no clause contains both a variable and its negation.  (Exercise 35.4-1 asks you to
remove this last assumption.)

1124Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
Theorem 35.6
Given  an  instance  of  MAX-3-CNF  satisfiability  withnvariablesx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
andmclauses,  the  randomized  algorithm  that  independently  sets  each  vari-
able  to1with  probability1=2and  to0with  probability1=2is  a  randomized
8=7-approximation algorithm.
ProofSuppose that we have independently set each variable to1with probabil-
ity1=2and to0with probability1=2.ForiD1;2;:::;m, we define the indicator
random variable
Y
i
DI
f
clauseiis satisfied
g
;
so thatY
i
D1as long as we have set at least one of the literals in theith clause
to1. Since no literal appears more than once in the same clause, and since we have
assumed that no variable and its negation appear in the same clause, the settings of
the three literals in each clause are independent. A clause is not satisfied only if all
three of its literals are set to0,andsoPr
f
clauseiis not satisfied
g
D.1=2/
3
D1=8.
Thus,  we have Pr
f
clauseiis satisfied
g
D11=8D7=8,  and by Lemma 5.1,
we have EŒY
i
D7=8.LetYbe the number of satisfied clauses overall, so that
YDY
1
CY
2
CCY
m
. Then, we have
EŒY DE
"
m
X
iD1
Y
i
#
D
m
X
iD1
EŒY
i
(by linearity of expectation)
D
m
X
iD1
7=8
D7m=8 :
Clearly,mis an upper  bound  on the number  of satisfied clauses,  and hence the
approximation ratio is at mostm=.7m=8/D8=7.
Approximating weighted vertex cover using linear programming
In theminimum-weight vertex-cover problem, we are given an undirected graph
GD.V; E/in which each vertex2Vhas an associated positive weightw./.
For any vertex coverV
0
V, we define the weight of the vertex coverw.V
0
/D
P
2V
0
w./. The goal is to find a vertex cover of minimum weight.
We cannot apply the algorithm used for unweighted vertex cover, nor can we use
a random solution;  both methods may return solutions that are far from optimal.
We shall, however, compute a lower bound on the weight of the minimum-weight

35.4Randomization and linear programming1125
vertex cover, by using a linear program.  We shall then “round” this solution and
use it to obtain a vertex cover.
Suppose that we associate a variablex./with each vertex2V,andletus
require thatx./equals either0or1for each2V. We putinto the vertex cover
if and only ifx./D1. Then, we can write the constraint that for any edge.u; /,
at least one ofuandmust be in the vertex cover asx.u/Cx./1.Thisview
gives  rise  to  the  following0-1 integer programfor  finding  a  minimum-weight
vertex cover:
minimize
X
2V
w./ x./(35.14)
subject to
x.u/Cx./1for each.u; /2E(35.15)
x./2
f
0; 1
g
for each2V:(35.16)
In the  special  case  in which all  the  weightsw./are  equal  to1,  this  formu-
lation  is  the  optimization  version  of  the  NP-hard  vertex-cover  problem.    Sup-
pose,  however,  that  we remove  the  constraint  thatx./2
f
0; 1
g
and  replace  it
by0x./1. We then obtain the following linear program, which is known as
thelinear-programming relaxation:
minimize
X
2V
w./ x./(35.17)
subject to
x.u/Cx./1for each.u; /2E(35.18)
x./1for each2V(35.19)
x./0for each2V:(35.20)
Any feasible solution to the 0-1 integer program in lines (35.14)–(35.16)  is also
a feasible solution to the linear program in lines (35.17)–(35.20).  Therefore, the
value of an optimal solution to the linear program gives a lower bound on the value
of an optimal solution to the 0-1 integer program, and hence a lower bound on the
optimal weight in the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem.
The following procedure uses the solution to the linear-programming relaxation
to construct an approximate solution to the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem:

1126Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
APPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC.G; w/
1CD;
2computeNx, an optimal solution to the linear program in lines (35.17)–(35.20)
3foreach2V
4ifNx./1=2
5CDC[
f

g
6returnC
The  A
PPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC  procedure  works  as follows.   Line 1 initial-
izes  the  vertex  cover  to  be  empty.Line  2  formulates  the  linear  program  in
lines  (35.17)–(35.20)  and  then  solves  this  linear  program.   An  optimal  solution
gives each vertexan associated valueNx./,where0Nx./1.  We use this
value to guide the choice of which vertices to add to the vertex coverCin lines 3–5.
IfNx./1=2,weaddtoC; otherwise we do not.  In effect, we are “rounding”
each fractional variable in the solution to the linear program to0or1in order to
obtain a solution to the 0-1 integer program in lines (35.14)–(35.16). Finally, line 6
returns the vertex coverC.
Theorem 35.7
Algorithm A
PPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a polynomial-time2-approximation al-
gorithm for the minimum-weight vertex-cover problem.
ProofBecause there is a polynomial-time algorithm to solve the linear program
in line 2, and because theforloop of lines 3–5 runs in polynomial time, A
PPROX-
M
IN-WEIGHT-VC is a polynomial-time algorithm.
Now  we  show  that  A
PPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC  is  a2-approximation  algo-
rithm.  LetC

be an optimal solution to the minimum-weight vertex-cover prob-
lem,  and  let ́

be  the  value  of  an  optimal  solution  to  the  linear  program  in
lines (35.17)–(35.20).  Since an optimal vertex cover is a feasible solution to the
linear program, ́

must be a lower bound onw.C

/,thatis,
 ́

w.C

/:(35.21)
Next,  we claim  that by rounding  the fractional  values of the variablesNx./,we
produce a setCthat is a vertex cover and satisfiesw.C /2 ́

.  To see thatCis
a vertex cover, consider any edge.u; /2E. By constraint (35.18), we know that
x.u/Cx./1, which implies that at least one ofNx.u/andNx./is at least1=2.
Therefore, at least one ofuandis included in the vertex cover, and so every edge
is covered.
Now, we consider the weight of the cover. We have

35.4Randomization and linear programming1127
 ́

D
X
2V
w./Nx./

X
2VWNx./1=2
w./Nx./

X
2VWNx./1=2
w./
1
2
D
X
2C
w./
1
2
D
1
2
X
2C
w./
D
1
2
w.C / :(35.22)
Combining inequalities (35.21) and (35.22) gives
w.C /2 ́

2w.C

/;
and hence A
PPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC is a2-approximation algorithm.
Exercises
35.4-1
Show that even if we allow a clause to contain both a variable and its negation, ran-
domly setting each variable to1with probability1=2and to0with probability1=2
still yields a randomized8=7-approximation algorithm.
35.4-2
TheMAX-CNF satisfiability problemis like the MAX-3-CNF satisfiability prob-
lem, except that it does not restrict each clause to have exactly3literals.  Give a
randomized2-approximation algorithm for the MAX-CNF satisfiability problem.
35.4-3
In the MAX-CUT problem,  we are given an unweighted undirected  graphGD
.V; E/. We define a cut.S; VS/as in Chapter 23 and theweightof a cut as the
number of edges crossing the cut.  The goal is to find a cut of maximum weight.
Suppose that for each vertex, we randomly and independently placeinSwith
probability1=2and inVSwith probability1=2.  Show that this algorithm is a
randomized2-approximation algorithm.

1128Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
35.4-4
Show that the constraints in line (35.19) are redundant in the sense that if we re-
move them from the linear program in lines (35.17)–(35.20), any optimal solution
to the resulting linear program must satisfyx./1for each2V.
35.5  The subset-sum problem
Recall  from  Section  34.5.5  that  an  instance  of  the  subset-sum  problem  is  a
pair.S; t /,whereSis a set
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
g
of positive integers andtis a posi-
tive integer.   This decision  problem  asks whether  there exists a subset  ofSthat
adds up exactly to the target valuet. As we saw in Section 34.5.5, this problem is
NP-complete.
The optimization problem associated with this decision problem arises in prac-
tical  applications.In  the  optimization  problem,  we  wish  to  find  a  subset  of
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
g
whose sum is as large as possible but not larger thant.Forex-
ample, we may have a truck that can carry no more thantpounds, andndifferent
boxes to ship, theith of which weighsx
i
pounds. We wish to fill the truck with as
heavy a load as possible without exceeding the given weight limit.
In this section, we present an exponential-time algorithm that computes the op-
timal value for this optimization  problem,  and then we show how to modify the
algorithm so that it becomes a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme. (Re-
call that a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme has a running time that is
polynomial in1=as well as in the size of the input.)
An exponential-time exact algorithm
Suppose  that  we  computed,  for  each  subsetS
0
ofS,  the  sum  of  the  elements
inS
0
,  and  then  we  selected,  among  the  subsets  whose  sum  does  not  exceedt,
the one whose sum was closest tot.  Clearly this algorithm would return the op-
timal solution,  but it could take exponential  time.  To implement this algorithm,
we  could  use  an  iterative  procedure  that,  in  iterationi,  computes  the  sums  of
all  subsets  of
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
i
g
,  using  as  a  starting  point  the  sums  of  all  subsets
of
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
i1
g
. In doing so, we would realize that once a particular subsetS
0
had a sum exceedingt, there would be no reason to maintain it, since no super-
set ofS
0
could be the optimal solution.  We now give an implementation of this
strategy.
The procedure  E
XACT-SUBSET-SUMtakes an input setSD
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
g
and  a target  valuet;  we’ll  see  its pseudocode  in a moment.   This procedure  it-

35.5The subset-sum problem1129
eratively computesL
i
,thelistofsumsofallsubsetsof
f
x
1
;:::;x
i
g
that do not
exceedt, and then it returns the maximum value inL
n
.
IfLis a list of positive integers andxis another positive integer,  then we let
LCxdenote the list of integers derived fromLby increasing each element ofL
byx. For example, ifLDh1; 2; 3; 5; 9i,thenLC2Dh3; 4; 5; 7; 11i.Wealsouse
this notation for sets, so that
SCxD
f
sCxWs2S
g
:
We also  use  an  auxiliary  procedure  M
ERGE-LISTS.L; L
0
/,  which  returns  the
sorted list that is the merge of its two sorted input listsLandL
0
with duplicate
values removed. Like the M
ERGEprocedure we used in merge sort (Section 2.3.1),
M
ERGE-LISTSruns in timeO.
j
L
j
C
j
L
0
j
/. We omit the pseudocode for M
ERGE-
L
ISTS.
E
XACT-SUBSET-SUM.S; t /
1nD
j
S
j
2L
0
Dh0i
3foriD1ton
4L
i
DMERGE-LISTS.L
i1
;L
i1
Cx
i
/
5remove fromL
i
every element that is greater thant
6returnthe largest element inL
n
To  see  how  EXACT-SUBSET-SUMworks,  letP
i
denote  the  set  of  all  values
obtained by selecting a (possibly empty) subset of
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
i
g
and summing
its members. For example, ifSD
f
1; 4; 5
g
,then
P
1
D
f
0; 1
g
;
P
2
D
f
0; 1; 4; 5
g
;
P
3
D
f
0; 1; 4; 5; 6; 9; 10
g
:
Given the identity
P
i
DP
i1
[.P
i1
Cx
i
/;(35.23)
we can prove by induction oni(see Exercise 35.5-1) that the listL
i
is a sorted list
containing every element ofP
i
whose value is not more thant.  Since the length
ofL
i
can be as much as2
i
,EXACT-SUBSET-SUMis an exponential-time algorithm
in general, although it is a polynomial-time algorithm in the special cases in whicht
is polynomial in
j
S
j
or all the numbers inSare bounded by a polynomial in
j
S
j
.
A fully polynomial-time approximation scheme
We can derive a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for the subset-sum
problem by “trimming” each listL
i
after it is created. The idea behind trimming is

1130Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
that if two values inLare close to each other, then since we want just an approxi-
mate solution, we do not need to maintain both of them explicitly. More precisely,
we use a trimming parameterısuch that0<ı<1.Whenwetrima listLbyı,
we remove as many elements fromLas possible,  in such a way that ifL
0
is the
result of trimmingL, then for every elementythat was removed fromL, there is
an element ́still inL
0
that approximatesy,thatis,
y
1Cı
 ́y:(35.24)
We can think of such a ́as “representing”yin the new listL
0
.  Each removed
elementyis represented by a remaining element ́satisfying inequality (35.24).
For example, ifıD0:1and
LDh10; 11; 12; 15; 20; 21; 22; 23; 24; 29i;
then we can trimLto obtain
L
0
Dh10; 12; 15; 20; 23; 29i;
where  the  deleted  value11is  represented  by10,  the  deleted  values21and22
are  represented  by20,  and  the  deleted  value24is  represented  by23.   Because
every element of the trimmed version of the list is also an element of the original
version of the list, trimming can dramatically decrease the number of elements kept
while keeping a close (and slightly smaller) representative value in the list for each
deleted element.
The following procedure trims listLDhy
1
;y
2
;:::;y
m
iin time‚.m/,givenL
andı,  and  assuming  thatLis  sorted  into  monotonically  increasing  order.   The
output of the procedure is a trimmed, sorted list.
T
RIM.L; ı/
1letmbe the length ofL
2L
0
Dhy
1
i
3lastDy
1
4foriD2tom
5ify
i
>last.1Cı///y
i
lastbecauseLis sorted
6appendy
i
onto the end ofL
0
7lastDy
i
8returnL
0
The procedure scans the elements ofLin monotonically increasing order. A num-
ber is appended onto the returned listL
0
only if it is the first element ofLor if it
cannot be represented by the most recent number placed intoL
0
.
Given the procedure T
RIM, we can construct our approximation scheme as fol-
lows.  This procedure takes as input a setSD
f
x
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
g
ofnintegers (in
arbitrary order), a target integert, and an “approximation parameter”,where

35.5The subset-sum problem1131
0<<1:(35.25)
It returns a value ́whose value is within a1Cfactor of the optimal solution.
A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUM.S;t;/
1nD
j
S
j
2L
0
Dh0i
3foriD1ton
4L
i
DMERGE-LISTS.L
i1
;L
i1
Cx
i
/
5L
i
DTRIM.L
i
;=2n/
6remove fromL
i
every element that is greater thant
7let ́

be the largest value inL
n
8return ́

Line 2 initializes the listL
0
to be the list containing just the element0.Thefor
loop in lines 3–6 computesL
i
as a sorted list containing a suitably trimmed ver-
sion of the setP
i
, with all elements larger thantremoved.  Since we createL
i
fromL
i1
, we must ensure that the repeated trimming doesn’t introduce too much
compounded inaccuracy.  In a moment, we shall see that A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUM
returns a correct approximation if one exists.
As an example, suppose we have the instance
SDh104; 102; 201; 101i
withtD308andD0:40.  The trimming parameterıis=8D0:05.A
PPROX-
S
UBSET-SUMcomputes the following values on the indicated lines:
line 2:L
0
Dh0i;
line 4:L
1
Dh0; 104i;
line 5:L
1
Dh0; 104i;
line 6:L
1
Dh0; 104i;
line 4:L
2
Dh0; 102; 104; 206i;
line 5:L
2
Dh0; 102; 206i;
line 6:L
2
Dh0; 102; 206i;
line 4:L
3
Dh0; 102; 201; 206; 303; 407i;
line 5:L
3
Dh0; 102; 201; 303; 407i;
line 6:L
3
Dh0; 102; 201; 303i;
line 4:L
4
Dh0; 101; 102; 201; 203; 302; 303; 404i;
line 5:L
4
Dh0; 101; 201; 302; 404i;
line 6:L
4
Dh0; 101; 201; 302i:

1132Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
The algorithm returns ́

D302as its answer, which is well withinD40%of
the optimal answer307D104C102C101; in fact, it is within2%.
Theorem 35.8
A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUMis a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme for the
subset-sum problem.
ProofThe operations of trimmingL
i
in line 5 and removing fromL
i
every ele-
ment that is greater thantmaintain the property that every element ofL
i
is also a
member ofP
i
. Therefore, the value ́

returned in line 8 is indeed the sum of some
subset ofS.Lety

2P
n
denote an optimal solution to the subset-sum problem.
Then, from line 6, we know that ́

y

.  By inequality (35.1), we need to show
thaty

= ́

1C. We must also show that the running time of this algorithm is
polynomial in both1=and the size of the input.
As Exercise 35.5-2 asks you to show, for every elementyinP
i
that is at mostt,
there exists an element ́2L
i
such that
y
.1C=2n/
i
 ́y:(35.26)
Inequality (35.26) must hold fory

2P
n
, and therefore there exists an element
 ́2L
n
such that
y

.1C=2n/
n
 ́y

;
and thus
y

 ́


1C

2n

n
:(35.27)
Since there exists an element ́2L
n
fulfilling inequality (35.27), the inequality
must hold for ́

, which is the largest value inL
n
;thatis,
y

 ́



1C

2n

n
:(35.28)
Now, we show thaty

= ́

1C. Wedosobyshowingthat.1C=2n/
n

1C.  By equation (3.14), we have lim
n!1
.1C=2n/
n
De
=2
.  Exercise 35.5-3
asks you to show that
d
dn

1C

2n

n
>0:(35.29)
Therefore,  the  function.1C=2n/
n
increases  withnas  it  approaches  its  limit
ofe
=2
, and we have

35.5The subset-sum problem1133

1C

2n

n
e
=2
1C=2C.=2/
2
(by inequality (3.13))
1C(by inequality (35.25))  .(35.30)
Combining inequalities (35.28) and (35.30) completes the analysis of the approxi-
mation ratio.
To show that A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUMis a fully polynomial-time approximation
scheme, we derive a bound on the length ofL
i
.  After trimming, successive ele-
ments ́and ́
0
ofL
i
must have the relationship ́
0
= ́ > 1C=2n. That is, they must
differ by a factor of at least1C=2n.  Each list, therefore, contains the value0,
possibly  the value1,  and up to

log
1C=2n
t
 ̆
additional  values.   The number  of
elements in each listL
i
is at most
log
1C=2n
tC2D
lnt
ln.1C=2n/
C2

2n.1C=2n/lnt

C2(by inequality (3.17))
<
3nlnt

C2(by inequality (35.25))  .
This bound is polynomial in the size of the input—which is the number of bits lgt
needed to representtplus the number of bits needed to represent the setS,whichis
in turn polynomial inn—and in1=. Since the running time of A
PPROX-SUBSET-
S
UMis polynomial in the lengths of theL
i
, we conclude that APPROX-SUBSET-
S
UMis a fully polynomial-time approximation scheme.
Exercises
35.5-1
Prove equation (35.23). Then show that after executing line 5 of E
XACT-SUBSET-
S
UM,L
i
is a sorted list containing every element ofP
i
whose value is not more
thant.
35.5-2
Using induction oni, prove inequality (35.26).
35.5-3
Prove inequality (35.29).

1134Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
35.5-4
How would you modify the approximation scheme presented in this section to find
a good approximation to the smallest value not less thantthat is a sum of some
subset of the given input list?
35.5-5
Modify the A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUMprocedure to also return the subset ofSthat
sums to the value ́

.
Problems
35-1  Bin packing
Suppose that we are given a set ofnobjects,  where the sizes
i
of theith object
satisfies0<s
i
<1. We wish to pack all the objects into the minimum number of
unit-size bins.  Each bin can hold any subset of the objects whose total size does
not exceed1.
a.Prove that the problem of determining the minimum number of bins required is
NP-hard. (Hint:Reduce from the subset-sum problem.)
Thefirst-fitheuristic takes each object in turn and places it into the first bin that
can accommodate it. LetSD
P
n
iD1
s
i
.
b.Argue that the optimal number of bins required is at least
d
S
e
.
c.Argue that the first-fit heuristic leaves at most one bin less than half full.
d.Prove  that  the  number  of  bins  used  by  the  first-fit  heuristic  is  never  more
than
d
2S
e
.
e.Prove an approximation ratio of2for the first-fit heuristic.
f.Give an efficient implementation of the first-fit heuristic, and analyze its running
time.
35-2  Approximating the size of a maximum clique
LetGD.V; E/be an undirected graph. For anyk1,defineG
.k/
to be the undi-
rected graph.V
.k/
;E
.k/
/,whereV
.k/
is the set of all orderedk-tuples of vertices
fromVandE
.k/
is defined so that.
1
;
2
;:::;
k
/is adjacent to.w
1
;w
2
;:::;w
k
/
if and only if foriD1;2;:::;k, either vertex
i
is adjacent tow
i
inG,orelse

i
Dw
i
.

Problems for Chapter 351135
a.Prove that the size of the maximum clique inG
.k/
is equal to thekth power of
the size of the maximum clique inG.
b.Argue that if there is an approximation algorithm that has a constant approxi-
mation ratio for finding a maximum-size clique, then there is a polynomial-time
approximation scheme for the problem.
35-3  Weighted set-covering problem
Suppose  that  we  generalize  the  set-covering  problem  so  that  each  setS
i
in  the
familyFhas an associated weightw
i
and the weight of a coverCis
P
S
i
2C
w
i
.
We wish to determine a minimum-weight cover. (Section 35.3 handles the case in
whichw
i
D1for alli.)
Show how to generalize  the greedy set-covering  heuristic in a natural manner
to provide an approximate solution for any instance of the weighted set-covering
problem. Show that your heuristic has an approximation ratio ofH.d/,wheredis
the maximum size of any setS
i
.
35-4  Maximum matching
Recall that for an undirected graphG, a matching is a set of edges such that no
two edges in the set are incident on the same vertex. In Section 26.3, we saw how
to find a maximum matching in a bipartite graph.  In this problem, we will look at
matchings in undirected graphs in general (i.e., the graphs are not required to be
bipartite).
a.Amaximal matchingis a matching  that  is  not  a proper  subset  of  any  other
matching. Show that a maximal matching need not be a maximum matching by
exhibiting an undirected graphGand a maximal matchingMinGthat is not a
maximum matching. (Hint:You can find such a graph with only four vertices.)
b.Consider an undirected graphGD.V; E/.GiveanO.E/-time greedy algo-
rithm to find a maximal matching inG.
In this problem,  we shall concentrate on a polynomial-time approximation  algo-
rithm for maximum matching. Whereas the fastest known algorithm for maximum
matching  takes  superlinear  (but  polynomial)  time,  the  approximation  algorithm
here will run in linear time.  You will show that the linear-time greedy algorithm
for  maximal  matching  in  part  (b)  is a2-approximation  algorithm  for  maximum
matching.
c.Show that the size of a maximum matching inGis a lower bound on the size
of any vertex cover forG.

1136Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
d.Consider a maximal matchingMinGD.V; E/.Let
TD
f
2VWsome edge inMis incident on
g
:
What can you say about the subgraph ofGinduced by the vertices ofGthat
are not inT?
e.Conclude from part (d) that2
j
M
j
is the size of a vertex cover forG.
f.Using parts (c) and (e), prove that the greedy algorithm in part (b) is a2-approx-
imation algorithm for maximum matching.
35-5  Parallel machine scheduling
In theparallel-machine-scheduling problem,wearegivennjobs,J
1
;J
2
;:::;J
n
,
where each jobJ
k
has an associated nonnegative processing time ofp
k
.Weare
also givenmidentical machines,M
1
;M
2
;:::;M
m
.  Any job can run on any ma-
chine.  Aschedulespecifies,  for each jobJ
k
,  the machine on which it runs and
the time period during which it runs.  Each jobJ
k
must run on some machineM
i
forp
k
consecutive time units,  and during that time period no other job may run
onM
i
.LetC
k
denote thecompletion timeof jobJ
k
, that is, the time at which
jobJ
k
completes processing. Given a schedule, we defineC
max
Dmax
1jn
C
j
to
be themakespanof the schedule.  The goal is to find a schedule whose makespan
is minimum.
For example, suppose that we have two machinesM
1
andM
2
and that we have
four jobsJ
1
;J
2
;J
3
;J
4
, withp
1
D2,p
2
D12,p
3
D4,andp
4
D5.  Then one
possible schedule runs,  on machineM
1
,jobJ
1
followed by jobJ
2
, and on ma-
chineM
2
, it runs jobJ
4
followed by jobJ
3
. For this schedule,C
1
D2,C
2
D14,
C
3
D9,C
4
D5,andC
max
D14. An optimal schedule runsJ
2
on machineM
1
,and
it runs jobsJ
1
,J
3
,andJ
4
on machineM
2
.  For this schedule,C
1
D2,C
2
D12,
C
3
D6,C
4
D11,andC
max
D12.
Given a parallel-machine-scheduling problem, we letC

max
denote the makespan
of an optimal schedule.
a.Show that the optimal makespan is at least as large as the greatest processing
time, that is,
C

max
max
1kn
p
k
:
b.Show that the optimal makespan is at least as large as the average machine load,
that is,
C

max

1
m
X
1kn
p
k
:

Problems for Chapter 351137
Suppose that we use the following greedy algorithm for parallel machine schedul-
ing: whenever a machine is idle, schedule any job that has not yet been scheduled.
c.Write  pseudocode  to  implement  this  greedy  algorithm.   What  is the  running
time of your algorithm?
d.For the schedule returned by the greedy algorithm, show that
C
max

1
m
X
1kn
p
k
Cmax
1kn
p
k
:
Conclude that this algorithm is a polynomial-time2-approximation algorithm.
35-6  Approximating a maximum spanning tree
LetGD.V; E/be an undirected graph with distinct edge weightsw.u; /on each
edge.u; /2E.  For each vertex2V,letmax./Dmax
.u;/2E
f
w.u; /
g
be
the maximum-weight edge incident on that vertex.  LetS
G
D
f
max./W2V
g
be the set of maximum-weight  edges incident  on each vertex,  and letT
G
be the
maximum-weight spanning tree ofG, that is, the spanning tree of maximum total
weight. For any subset of edgesE
0
E,definew.E
0
/D
P
.u;/2E
0
w.u; /.
a.Give an example of a graph with at least4vertices for whichS
G
DT
G
.
b.Give an example of a graph with at least4vertices for whichS
G
¤T
G
.
c.Prove thatS
G
T
G
for any graphG.
d.Prove thatw.T
G
/w.S
G
/=2for any graphG.
e.Give anO.VCE/-time algorithm to compute a2-approximation to the maxi-
mum spanning tree.
35-7  An approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem
Recall the knapsack problem from Section 16.2.  There arenitems, where theith
item  is  worth
i
dollars  and  weighsw
i
pounds.   We  are  also  given  a knapsack
that can hold at mostWpounds.  Here, we add the further assumptions that each
weightw
i
is at mostWand that the items are indexed in monotonically decreasing
order of their values:
1

2

n
.
In the 0-1 knapsack problem, we wish to find a subset of the items whose total
weight is at mostWand whose total value is maximum.  The fractional knapsack
problem  is like the 0-1 knapsack  problem,  except  that  we are allowed to take a
fraction of each item,  rather than being restricted  to taking either all or none of

1138Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
each item.  If we take a fractionx
i
of itemi,where0x
i
1, we contribute
x
i
w
i
to the weight of the knapsack and receive valuex
i

i
.  Our goal is to develop
a polynomial-time2-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.
In order to design a polynomial-time algorithm, we consider restricted instances
of the 0-1 knapsack problem.  Given an instanceIof the knapsack problem, we
form restricted instancesI
j
,forjD1;2;:::;n, by removing items1;2;:::;j1
and requiring the solution to include itemj(all of itemjin both the fractional
and 0-1 knapsack problems). No items are removed in instanceI
1
. For instanceI
j
,
letP
j
denote an optimal  solution to the 0-1 problem  andQ
j
denote an optimal
solution to the fractional problem.
a.Argue that an optimal solution to instanceIof the 0-1 knapsack problem is one
of
f
P
1
;P
2
;:::;P
n
g
.
b.Prove that we can find an optimal solutionQ
j
to the fractional problem for in-
stanceI
j
by including  itemjand then using the greedy  algorithm  in which
at  each  step,  we  take  as  much  as  possible  of  the  unchosen  item  in  the  set
f
jC1; jC2;:::;n
g
with maximum value per pound
i
=w
i
.
c.Prove that  we can always  construct  an optimal  solutionQ
j
to the  fractional
problem for instanceI
j
that includes at most one item fractionally.  That is, for
all items except possibly one, we either include all of the item or none of the
item in the knapsack.
d.Given an optimal solutionQ
j
to the fractional problem for instanceI
j
,form
solutionR
j
fromQ
j
by deleting any fractional items fromQ
j
.Let.S/denote
the total value of items taken in a solutionS.  Prove that.R
j
/.Q
j
/=2
.P
j
/=2.
e.Give a polynomial-time algorithm that returns a maximum-value solution from
the set
f
R
1
;R
2
;:::;R
n
g
, and prove that your algorithm is a polynomial-time
2-approximation algorithm for the 0-1 knapsack problem.
Chapter notes
Although  methods  that  do  not  necessarily  compute  exact  solutions  have  been
known  for  thousands  of  years  (for  example,  methods  to  approximate  the  value
of), the notion of an approximation algorithm is much more recent.  Hochbaum
[172] credits Garey, Graham, and Ullman [128] and Johnson [190] with formal-
izing the concept  of a polynomial-time  approximation  algorithm.  The first such
algorithm is often credited to Graham [149].

Notes for Chapter 351139
Since  this  early  work,  thousands  of  approximation  algorithms  have  been  de-
signed  for a wide  range  of  problems,  and  there  is a wealth  of  literature  on this
field.  Recent texts by Ausiello et al. [26],  Hochbaum [172], and Vazirani  [345]
deal exclusively with approximation  algorithms,  as do surveys by Shmoys [315]
and Klein and Young [207]. Several other texts, such as Garey and Johnson [129]
and Papadimitriou and Steiglitz [271], have significant coverage of approximation
algorithms as well.  Lawler, Lenstra, Rinnooy Kan, and Shmoys [225] provide an
extensive treatment of approximation algorithms for the traveling-salesman prob-
lem.
Papadimitriou  and Steiglitz attribute  the algorithm  A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVER
to F. Gavril and M. Yannakakis. The vertex-cover problem has been studied exten-
sively (Hochbaum [172] lists 16 different approximation algorithms for this prob-
lem), but all the approximation ratios are at least2o.1/.
The algorithm A
PPROX-TSP-TOURappears in a paper by Rosenkrantz, Stearns,
and Lewis [298]. Christofides improved on this algorithm and gave a3=2-approx-
imation algorithm for the traveling-salesman problem with the triangle inequality.
Arora [22] and Mitchell [257] have shown that if the points are in the euclidean
plane, there is a polynomial-time approximation scheme.  Theorem 35.3 is due to
Sahni and Gonzalez [301].
The analysis  of  the  greedy  heuristic  for  the  set-covering  problem  is modeled
after the proof published by Chv ́atal [68] of a more general result; the basic result
as presented here is due to Johnson [190] and Lov ́asz [238].
The algorithm A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUMand its analysis are loosely modeled after
related  approximation  algorithms  for  the knapsack  and subset-sum  problems  by
Ibarra and Kim [187].
Problem 35-7 is a combinatorial version of a more general result on approximat-
ing knapsack-type integer programs by Bienstock and McClosky [45].
The randomized algorithm for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability is implicit in the work
of Johnson  [190].  The weighted vertex-cover  algorithm  is by Hochbaum  [171].
Section  35.4  only  touches  on  the  power  of  randomization  and  linear  program-
ming in the design of approximation algorithms. A combination of these two ideas
yields a technique called “randomized rounding,” which formulates a problem as
an integer linear program, solves the linear-programming relaxation, and interprets
the variables in the solution as probabilities.  These probabilities then help guide
the solution of the original problem.  This technique was first used by Raghavan
and Thompson [290], and it has had many subsequent uses.  (See Motwani, Naor,
and Raghavan [261] for a survey.)  Several other notable recent ideas in the field
of approximation  algorithms  include  the primal-dual  method (see  Goemans and
Williamson [135] for a survey), finding sparse cuts for use in divide-and-conquer
algorithms [229], and the use of semidefinite programming [134].

1140Chapter 35Approximation Algorithms
As mentioned in the chapter notes for Chapter 34, recent results in probabilisti-
cally checkable proofs have led to lower bounds on the approximability of many
problems,  including  several  in  this  chapter.   In  addition  to  the  references  there,
the chapter  by Arora and Lund [23] contains  a good description  of the relation-
ship between probabilistically checkable proofs and the hardness of approximating
various problems.



VIII  Appendix: Mathematical Background

Introduction
When we analyze algorithms, we often need to draw upon a body of mathematical
tools. Some of these tools are as simple as high-school algebra, but others may be
new to you.  In Part I, we saw how to manipulate asymptotic notations and solve
recurrences. This appendix comprises a compendium of several other concepts and
methods we use to analyze algorithms.  As noted in the introduction to Part I, you
may have seen much of the material in this appendix before having read this book
(although the specific notational conventions we use might occasionally differ from
those you have seen elsewhere). Hence, you should treat this appendix as reference
material.   As in the  rest  of  this book,  however,  we have  included  exercises  and
problems, in order for you to improve your skills in these areas.
Appendix  A  offers  methods  for  evaluating  and  bounding  summations,  which
occur frequently in the analysis of algorithms.  Many of the formulas here appear
in any calculus text, but you will find it convenient to have these methods compiled
in one place.
Appendix B contains basic definitions and notations for sets, relations, functions,
graphs, and trees. It also gives some basic properties of these mathematical objects.
Appendix C begins with elementary principles of counting: permutations, com-
binations, and the like.  The remainder contains definitions and properties of basic
probability.   Most of the algorithms in this book require no probability  for their
analysis, and thus you can easily omit the latter sections of the chapter on a first
reading, even without skimming them.  Later, when you encounter a probabilistic
analysis that you want to understand better, you will find Appendix C well orga-
nized for reference purposes.

1144Part VIII    Appendix: Mathematical Background
Appendix  D defines  matrices,  their  operations,  and some of  their  basic  prop-
erties.  You have probably seen most of this material already if you have taken a
course in linear algebra, but you might find it helpful to have one place to look for
our notation and definitions.

ASummations
When an algorithm contains an iterative control construct such as awhileorfor
loop, we can express its running time as the sum of the times spent on each exe-
cution of the body of the loop.  For example, we found in Section 2.2 that thejth
iteration of insertion sort took time proportional tojin the worst case. By adding
up the time spent on each iteration, we obtained the summation (or series)
n
X
jD2
j:
When we evaluated this summation, we attained a bound of‚.n
2
/on the worst-
case running time of the algorithm. This example illustrates why you should know
how to manipulate and bound summations.
Section A.1 lists several basic formulas involving summations.  Section A.2 of-
fers useful techniques for bounding summations.  We present the formulas in Sec-
tion A.1 without proof, though proofs for some of them appear in Section A.2 to
illustrate the methods of that section. You can find most of the other proofs in any
calculus text.
A.1  Summation formulas and properties
Given a sequencea
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
of numbers, wherenis a nonnegative integer, we
can write the finite suma
1
Ca
2
CCa
n
as
n
X
kD1
a
k
:
IfnD0, the value of the summation is defined to be0. The value of a finite series
is always well defined, and we can add its terms in any order.
Given an infinite sequencea
1
;a
2
;:::of numbers, we can write the infinite sum
a
1
Ca
2
Cas

1146Appendix ASummations
1
X
kD1
a
k
;
which we interpret to mean
lim
n!1
n
X
kD1
a
k
:
If the limit does not exist, the seriesdiverges; otherwise, itconverges.  The terms
of  a convergent  series  cannot  always  be added  in  any order.   We can,  however,
rearrange the terms of anabsolutely convergent series, that is, a series
P
1
kD1
a
k
for which the series
P
1
kD1
j
a
k
j
also converges.
Linearity
For any real numbercand any finite sequencesa
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
andb
1
;b
2
;:::;b
n
,
n
X
kD1
.ca
k
Cb
k
/Dc
n
X
kD1
a
k
C
n
X
kD1
b
k
:
The linearity property also applies to infinite convergent series.
We can exploit the linearity property to manipulate summations incorporating
asymptotic notation. For example,
n
X
kD1
‚.f .k//D‚
 
n
X
kD1
f.k/
!
:
In this equation, the‚-notation on the left-hand side applies to the variablek,but
on the right-hand side, it applies ton.  We can also apply such manipulations to
infinite convergent series.
Arithmetic series
The summation
n
X
kD1
kD1C2CCn;
is anarithmetic seriesand has the value
n
X
kD1
kD
1
2
n.nC1/(A.1)
D‚.n
2
/:(A.2)

A.1    Summation formulas and properties1147
Sums of squares and cubes
We have the following summations of squares and cubes:
n
X
kD0
k
2
D
n.nC1/.2nC1/
6
;(A.3)
n
X
kD0
k
3
D
n
2
.nC1/
2
4
:(A.4)
Geometric series
For realx¤1, the summation
n
X
kD0
x
k
D1CxCx
2
CCx
n
is ageometricorexponential seriesand has the value
n
X
kD0
x
k
D
x
nC1
1
x1
:(A.5)
When the summation is infinite and
j
x
j
<1, we have the infinite decreasing geo-
metric series
1
X
kD0
x
k
D
1
1x
:(A.6)
Harmonic series
For positive integersn,thenthharmonic numberis
H
n
D1C
1
2
C
1
3
C
1
4
CC
1
n
D
n
X
kD1
1
k
DlnnCO.1/ :(A.7)
(We shall prove a related bound in Section A.2.)
Integrating and differentiating series
By integrating or differentiating the formulas above, additional formulas arise. For
example,  by differentiating  both sides  of the infinite  geometric  series  (A.6) and
multiplying byx,weget

1148Appendix ASummations
1
X
kD0
kx
k
D
x
.1x/
2
(A.8)
for
j
x
j
<1.
Telescoping series
For any sequencea
0
;a
1
;:::;a
n
,
n
X
kD1
.a
k
a
k1
/Da
n
a
0
;(A.9)
since each of the termsa
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n1
is added in exactly once and subtracted out
exactly once. We say that the sumtelescopes. Similarly,
n1
X
kD0
.a
k
a
kC1
/Da
0
a
n
:
As an example of a telescoping sum, consider the series
n1
X
kD1
1
k.kC1/
:
Since we can rewrite each term as
1
k.kC1/
D
1
k

1
kC1
;
we get
n1
X
kD1
1
k.kC1/
D
n1
X
kD1

1
k

1
kC1

D1
1
n
:
Products
We can write the finite producta
1
a
2
a
n
as
n
Y
kD1
a
k
:
IfnD0, the value of the product is defined to be1. We can convert a formula with
a product to a formula with a summation by using the identity
lg
 
n
Y
kD1
a
k
!
D
n
X
kD1
lga
k
:

A.2    Bounding summations1149
Exercises
A.1-1
Find a simple formula for
P
n
kD1
.2k1/.
A.1-2?
Show that
P
n
kD1
1=.2k1/Dln.
p
n/CO.1/by  manipulating  the harmonic
series.
A.1-3
Show that
P
1
kD0
k
2
x
k
Dx.1Cx/=.1x/
3
for0<
j
x
j
<1.
A.1-4?
Show that
P
1
kD0
.k1/=2
k
D0.
A.1-5?
Evaluate the sum
P
1
kD1
.2kC1/x
2k
.
A.1-6
Prove that
P
n
kD1
O.f
k
.i //DO

P
n
kD1
f
k
.i /

by using the linearity property of
summations.
A.1-7
Evaluate the product
Q
n
kD1
24
k
.
A.1-8?
Evaluate the product
Q
n
kD2
.11= k
2
/.
A.2  Bounding summations
We have many techniques  at our disposal  for bounding  the summations that de-
scribe the running times of algorithms. Here are some of the most frequently used
methods.
Mathematical induction
The most basic way to evaluate a series is to use mathematical induction.  As an
example, let us prove that the arithmetic series
P
n
kD1
kevaluates to
1
2
n.nC1/.We
can easily verify this assertion fornD1.  We make the inductive assumption that

1150Appendix ASummations
it holds forn, and we prove that it holds fornC1.Wehave
nC1
X
kD1
kD
n
X
kD1
kC.nC1/
D
1
2
n.nC1/C.nC1/
D
1
2
.nC1/.nC2/ :
You don’t always need to guess the exact value of a summation in order to use
mathematical induction. Instead, you can use induction to prove a bound on a sum-
mation.  As an example, let us prove that the geometric series
P
n
kD0
3
k
isO.3
n
/.
More specifically, let us prove that
P
n
kD0
3
k
c3
n
for some constantc.Forthe
initial conditionnD0,wehave
P
0
kD0
3
k
D1c1as long asc1. Assuming
that the bound holds forn, let us prove that it holds fornC1.Wehave
nC1
X
kD0
3
k
D
n
X
kD0
3
k
C3
nC1
c3
n
C3
nC1
(by the inductive hypothesis)
D

1
3
C
1
c

c3
nC1
c3
nC1
as long as.1=3C1=c/1or, equivalently,c3=2.  Thus,
P
n
kD0
3
k
DO.3
n
/,
as we wished to show.
We have to be careful when we use asymptotic notation to prove bounds by in-
duction.  Consider the following fallacious proof that
P
n
kD1
kDO.n/.  Certainly,
P
1
kD1
kDO.1/. Assuming that the bound holds forn, we now prove it fornC1:
nC1
X
kD1
kD
n
X
kD1
kC.nC1/
DO.n/C.nC1/
wrong!!
DO.nC1/ :
The bug in the argument is that the “constant” hidden by the “big-oh” grows withn
and thus is not constant. We have not shown that the same constant works foralln.
Bounding the terms
We can sometimes obtain a good upper bound on a series by bounding each term
of the series, and it often suffices to use the largest term to bound the others.  For

A.2    Bounding summations1151
example, a quick upper bound on the arithmetic series (A.1) is
n
X
kD1
k
n
X
kD1
n
Dn
2
:
In general, for a series
P
n
kD1
a
k
,ifweleta
max
Dmax
1kn
a
k
,then
n
X
kD1
a
k
na
max
:
The technique of bounding each term in a series by the largest term is a weak
method when the series can in fact be bounded by a geometric series.  Given the
series
P
n
kD0
a
k
, suppose thata
kC1
=a
k
rfor allk0,where0<r <1is a
constant.  We can bound the sum by an infinite decreasing geometric series, since
a
k
a
0
r
k
, and thus
n
X
kD0
a
k

1
X
kD0
a
0
r
k
Da
0
1
X
kD0
r
k
Da
0
1
1r
:
We can apply this method to bound the summation
P
1
kD1
.k=3
k
/.  In order to
start the summation atkD0, we rewrite it as
P
1
kD0
..kC1/=3
kC1
/.Thefirst
term (a
0
)is1=3, and the ratio (r) of consecutive terms is
.kC2/=3
kC2
.kC1/=3
kC1
D
1
3

kC2
kC1

2
3
for allk0. Thus, we have
1
X
kD1
k
3
k
D
1
X
kD0
kC1
3
kC1

1
3

1
12=3
D1:

1152Appendix ASummations
A common bug in applying  this method is to show that  the ratio of consecu-
tive terms is less than1and then to assume that the summation is bounded by a
geometric series. An example is the infinite harmonic series, which diverges since
1
X
kD1
1
k
Dlim
n!1
n
X
kD1
1
k
Dlim
n!1
‚.lgn/
D1:
The ratio of the.kC1/st andkth terms in this series isk=.kC1/ < 1, but the series
is not bounded by a decreasing geometric series. To bound a series by a geometric
series, we must show that there is anr<1,whichisaconstant, such that the ratio
of all pairs of consecutive terms never exceedsr. In the harmonic series, no suchr
exists because the ratio becomes arbitrarily close to1.
Splitting summations
One way to obtain bounds on a difficult summation is to express the series as the
sum of two or more series by partitioning the range of the index and then to bound
each of the resulting series.  For example,  suppose we try to find a lower bound
on the arithmetic series
P
n
kD1
k, which we have already seen has an upper bound
ofn
2
. We might attempt to bound each term in the summation by the smallest term,
but since that term is1, we get a lower bound ofnfor the summation—far off from
our upper bound ofn
2
.
We can obtain a better lower bound by first splitting the summation. Assume for
convenience thatnis even. We have
n
X
kD1
kD
n=2
X
kD1
kC
n
X
kDn=2C1
k

n=2
X
kD1
0C
n
X
kDn=2C1
.n=2/
D.n=2/
2
D.n
2
/;
which is an asymptotically tight bound, since
P
n
kD1
kDO.n
2
/.
For a summation arising from the analysis of an algorithm,  we can often split
the summation and ignore a constant number of the initial terms.  Generally, this
technique applies when each terma
k
in a summation
P
n
kD0
a
k
is independent ofn.

A.2    Bounding summations1153
Then for any constantk
0
>0, we can write
n
X
kD0
a
k
D
k
0
1
X
kD0
a
k
C
n
X
kDk
0
a
k
D‚.1/C
n
X
kDk
0
a
k
;
since the initial terms of the summation are all constant and there are a constant
number of them.  We can then use other methods to bound
P
n
kDk
0
a
k
.  This tech-
nique applies to infinite summations as well.  For example, to find an asymptotic
upper bound on
1
X
kD0
k
2
2
k
;
we observe that the ratio of consecutive terms is
.kC1/
2
=2
kC1
k
2
=2
k
D
.kC1/
2
2k
2

8
9
ifk3. Thus, the summation can be split into
1
X
kD0
k
2
2
k
D
2
X
kD0
k
2
2
k
C
1
X
kD3
k
2
2
k

2
X
kD0
k
2
2
k
C
9
8
1
X
kD0

8
9

k
DO.1/ ;
since the first summation has a constant number of terms and the second summation
is a decreasing geometric series.
The technique of splitting summations can help us determine asymptotic bounds
in much more difficult situations.  For example, we can obtain a bound ofO.lgn/
on the harmonic series (A.7):
H
n
D
n
X
kD1
1
k
:
We do so by splitting the range1toninto
b
lgn
c
C1pieces and upper-bounding
the contribution of each piece by1.ForiD0; 1; : : : ;
b
lgn
c
,theith piece consists

1154Appendix ASummations
of the terms starting at1=2
i
and going up to but not including1=2
iC1
.  The last
piece might contain terms not in the original harmonic series, and thus we have
n
X
kD1
1
k

blgnc
X
iD0
2
i
1
X
jD0
1
2
i
Cj

blgnc
X
iD0
2
i
1
X
jD0
1
2
i
D
blgnc
X
iD0
1
lgnC1:(A.10)
Approximation by integrals
When a summation has the form
P
n
kDm
f.k/,wheref.k/is a monotonically in-
creasing function, we can approximate it by integrals:
Z
n
m1
f.x/dx
n
X
kDm
f.k/
Z
nC1
m
f.x/dx :(A.11)
Figure A.1 justifies this approximation.  The summation is represented as the area
of the rectangles in the figure, and the integral is the shaded region under the curve.
Whenf.k/is a monotonically decreasing function, we can use a similar method
to provide the bounds
Z
nC1
m
f.x/dx
n
X
kDm
f.k/
Z
n
m1
f.x/dx :(A.12)
The integral approximation (A.12) gives a tight estimate for thenth harmonic
number. For a lower bound, we obtain
n
X
kD1
1
k

Z
nC1
1
dx
x
Dln.nC1/ :(A.13)
For the upper bound, we derive the inequality
n
X
kD2
1
k

Z
n
1
dx
x
Dlnn;

A.2    Bounding summations1155
n+1n–1n–2m+2mm–1
f
 (
m
)
f
 (
m
+1)
f
 (
m
+2)
f
 (
n
–2)
f
 (
n
–1)
f
 (
n
)
f(x)
x
......
n
......
(a)
m+1
n+1n–1n–2m+2mm–1
f
 (
m
)
f
 (
m
+1)
f
 (
m
+2)
f
 (
n
–2)
f
 (
n
–1)
f
 (
n
)
f(x)
x
......
n
......
(b)
m+1
Figure A.1Approximation  of
P
n
kDm
f.k/by  integrals.   The  area  of  each  rectangle  is  shown
within the rectangle,  and the total rectangle  area represents  the value  of the summation.   The in-
tegral  is  represented  by  the  shaded  areaunder  the  curve.    By  comparing  areas  in(a),weget
R
n
m1
f.x/dx
P
n
kDm
f.k/,  and  then by shifting the  rectangles  one  unit  to the  right,  we  get
P
n
kDm
f.k/
R
nC1
m
f.x/dxin(b).

1156Appendix ASummations
which yields the bound
n
X
kD1
1
k
lnnC1:(A.14)
Exercises
A.2-1
Show that
P
n
kD1
1= k
2
is bounded above by a constant.
A.2-2
Find an asymptotic upper bound on the summation
blgnc
X
kD0
 ̇
n=2
k

:
A.2-3
Show that thenth harmonic number is.lgn/by splitting the summation.
A.2-4
Approximate
P
n
kD1
k
3
with an integral.
A.2-5
Why  didn’t  we  use  the  integral  approximation  (A.12)  directly  on
P
n
kD1
1= kto
obtain an upper bound on thenth harmonic number?
Problems
A-1  Bounding summations
Give asymptotically tight bounds on the following summations. Assume thatr0
ands0are constants.
a.
n
X
kD1
k
r
.
b.
n
X
kD1
lg
s
k.

Notes for Appendix A1157
c.
n
X
kD1
k
r
lg
s
k.
Appendix notes
Knuth [209] provides an excellent reference for the material presented here.  You
can find basic properties of series in any good calculus book, such as Apostol [18]
or Thomas et al. [334].

BSets, Etc.
Many chapters of this book touch on the elements of discrete mathematics.  This
appendix reviews more completely the notations, definitions, and elementary prop-
erties of sets, relations, functions, graphs, and trees. If you are already well versed
in this material, you can probably just skim this chapter.
B.1  Sets
Asetis a collection of distinguishable objects, called itsmembersorelements.If
an objectxis a member of a setS, we writex2S(read “xisamemberofS”
or, more briefly,  “xis inS”).  Ifxis not a member ofS, we writex62S.We
can  describe  a  set  by  explicitly  listing  its  members  as  a  list  inside  braces.   For
example,  we can define a setSto contain precisely the numbers1,2,and3by
writingSD
f
1; 2; 3
g
.Since2is a member of the setS, we can write22S,and
since4is not a member, we have4...S. A set cannot contain the same object more
than once,
1
and its elements are not ordered.  Two setsAandBareequal, written
ADB, if they contain the same elements. For example,
f
1; 2; 3; 1
g
D
f
1; 2; 3
g
D
f
3; 2; 1
g
.
We adopt special notations for frequently encountered sets:

;denotes theempty set, that is, the set containing no members.

Zdenotes the set ofintegers, that is, the set
f
:::;2;1; 0; 1; 2; : : :
g
.

Rdenotes the set ofreal numbers.

Ndenotes the set ofnatural numbers, that is, the set
f
0; 1; 2; : : :
g
.
2
1
A variation of a set, which can contain the same object more than once, is called amultiset.
2
Some authors start the natural numbers with1instead of0.  The modern trend seems to be to start
with0.

B.1    Sets1159
If all the elements of a setAare contained in a setB,thatis,ifx2Aimplies
x2B,  then  we writeABand  say  thatAis  asubsetofB.   A  setAis  a
proper subsetofB, writtenAB,ifABbutA¤B. (Some authors use the
symbol “” to denote the ordinary subset relation,  rather than the proper-subset
relation.)  For any setA,wehaveAA.  For two setsAandB,wehaveADB
if and only ifABandBA.  For any three setsA,B,andC,ifAB
andBC,thenAC. For any setA,wehave;A.
We sometimes define sets in terms of other sets. Given a setA, we can define a
setBAby stating a property that distinguishes the elements ofB. For example,
we can define the set of even integers by
f
xWx2Zandx=2is an integer
g
.The
colon in this notation is read “such that.” (Some authors use a vertical bar in place
of the colon.)
Given two setsAandB, we can also define new sets by applyingset operations:

Theintersectionof setsAandBis the set
A\BD
f
xWx2Aandx2B
g
:

Theunionof setsAandBis the set
A[BD
f
xWx2Aorx2B
g
:

Thedifferencebetween two setsAandBis the set
ABD
f
xWx2Aandx...B
g
:
Set operations obey the following laws:
Empty set laws:
A\; D ;;
A[; DA:
Idempotency laws:
A\ADA;
A[ADA:
Commutative laws:
A\BDB\A;
A[BDB[A:

1160Appendix BSets, Etc.
AAAAA
A
BBBBB


.B\C/[
[
DD
DD
A.B\C/.AB/.AC/
CCCCC
Figure B.1A Venn diagram illustrating the first of DeMorgan’s laws (B.2). Each of the setsA,B,
andCis represented as a circle.
Associative laws:
A\.B\C/D.A\B/\C;
A[.B[C/D.A[B/[C:
Distributive laws:
A\.B[C/D.A\B/[.A\C/ ;
A[.B\C/D.A[B/\.A[C/ :
(B.1)
Absorption laws:
A\.A[B/DA;
A[.A\B/DA:
DeMorgan’s laws:
A.B\C/D.AB/[.AC/ ;
A.B[C/D.AB/\.AC/ :
(B.2)
Figure B.1 illustrates the first of DeMorgan’s laws, using aVenn diagram: a graph-
ical picture in which sets are represented as regions of the plane.
Often, all the sets under consideration are subsets of some larger setUcalled the
universe. For example, if we are considering various sets made up only of integers,
the setZof integers is an appropriate universe. Given a universeU,wedefinethe
complementof a setAas
ADUAD
f
xWx2Uandx62A
g
.  For any set
AU, we have the following laws:
ADA;
A\
AD;;
A[
ADU:

B.1    Sets1161
We can rewrite DeMorgan’s laws (B.2) with set complements.  For any two sets
B; CU,wehave
B\CDB[C;
B[CDB\C:
Two setsAandBaredisjointif they have no elements in common, that is, if
A\BD;. A collectionSD
f
S
i
g
of nonempty sets forms apartitionof a setSif

the sets arepairwise disjoint,thatis,S
i
;S
j
2Sandi¤jimplyS
i
\S
j
D;,
and

their union isS,thatis,
SD
[
S
i
2S
S
i
:
In other words,Sforms a partition ofSif each element ofSappears in exactly
oneS
i
2S.
The number of elements in a set is thecardinality(orsize) of the set, denoted
j
S
j
.
Two sets have the same cardinality if their elements can be put into a one-to-one
correspondence.  The cardinality of the empty set is
j
;
j
D0. If the cardinality of a
set is a natural number, we say the set isfinite; otherwise, it isinfinite. An infinite
set that can be put into a one-to-one correspondence with the natural numbersNis
countably infinite; otherwise, it isuncountable.  For example, the integersZare
countable, but the realsRare uncountable.
For any two finite setsAandB, we have the identity
j
A[B
j
D
j
A
j
C
j
B
j

j
A\B
j
;(B.3)
from which we can conclude that
j
A[B
j

j
A
j
C
j
B
j
:
IfAandBare disjoint,  then
j
A\B
j
D0and thus
j
A[B
j
D
j
A
j
C
j
B
j
.If
AB,then
j
A
j

j
B
j
.
A  finite  set  ofnelements  is  sometimes  called  ann-set.A1-set  is  called  a
singleton. A subset ofkelements of a set is sometimes called ak-subset.
We denote the set of all subsets of a setS, including the empty set andSitself,
by2
S
; we call2
S
thepower setofS.  For example,2
fa;bg
D
f
;;
f
a
g
;
f
b
g
;
f
a; b
gg
.
The power set of a finite setShas cardinality2
jSj
(see Exercise B.1-5).
We sometimes care about setlike structures in which the elements are ordered.
Anordered pairof two elementsaandbis denoted.a; b/and is defined formally
as the set.a; b/D
f
a;
f
a; b
gg
. Thus, the ordered pair.a; b/isnotthesameasthe
ordered pair.b; a/.

1162Appendix BSets, Etc.
TheCartesian productof two setsAandB, denotedA	B, is the set of all
ordered  pairs  such  that  the  first  element  of  the  pair  is an  element  ofAand  the
second is an element ofB. More formally,
A	BD
f
.a; b/Wa2Aandb2B
g
:
For example,
f
a; b
g
	
f
a; b; c
g
D
f
.a; a/; .a; b/; .a; c/; .b; a/; .b; b/; .b; c/
g
.When
AandBare finite sets, the cardinality of their Cartesian product is
j
A	B
j
D
j
A
j

j
B
j
:(B.4)
The Cartesian product ofnsetsA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
is the set ofn-tuples
A
1
	A
2
		A
n
D
f
.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
/Wa
i
2A
i
foriD1;2;:::;n
g
;
whose cardinality is
j
A
1
	A
2
		A
n
j
D
j
A
1
j

j
A
2
j

j
A
n
j
if all sets are finite.  We denote ann-fold Cartesian product over a single setAby
the set
A
n
DA	A		A;
whose cardinality is
j
A
n
j
D
j
A
j
n
ifAis finite.  We can also view ann-tuple as a
finite sequence of lengthn(see page 1166).
Exercises
B.1-1
Draw Venn diagrams that illustrate the first of the distributive laws (B.1).
B.1-2
Prove the generalization of DeMorgan’s laws to any finite collection of sets:
A
1
\A
2
\\A
n
DA
1
[A
2
[[A
n
;
A
1
[A
2
[[A
n
DA
1
\A
2
\\A
n
:

B.2    Relations1163
B.1-3?
Prove the generalization of equation (B.3), which is called theprinciple of inclu-
sion and exclusion:
j
A
1
[A
2
[[A
n
j
D
j
A
1
j
C
j
A
2
j
CC
j
A
n
j

j
A
1
\A
2
j

j
A
1
\A
3
j
(all pairs)
C
j
A
1
\A
2
\A
3
j
C(all triples)
:
:
:
C.1/
n1
j
A
1
\A
2
\\A
n
j
:
B.1-4
Show that the set of odd natural numbers is countable.
B.1-5
Show that for any finite setS, the power set2
S
has2
jSj
elements (that is,  there
are2
jSj
distinct subsets ofS).
B.1-6
Give an inductive definition for ann-tuple by extending the set-theoretic definition
for an ordered pair.
B.2  Relations
Abinary relationRon two setsAandBis a subset of the Cartesian productA	B.
If.a; b/2R, we sometimes writeaRb. When we say thatRis a binary relation
on a setA, we mean thatRis a subset ofA	A.  For example,  the “less than”
relation on the natural numbers is the set
f
.a; b/Wa; b2Nanda<b
g
.Ann-ary
relation on setsA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
is a subset ofA
1
	A
2
		A
n
.
A binary relationRA	Aisreflexiveif
aRa
for alla2A.  For example, “D”and“” are reflexive relations onN,but“<”is
not. The relationRissymmetricif
aRbimpliesbRa
for alla; b2A.  For example, “D” is symmetric, but “<”and“” are not.  The
relationRistransitiveif
aRbandbRcimplyaRc

1164Appendix BSets, Etc.
for alla; b; c2A. For example, the relations “<,” “,” and “D” are transitive, but
the relationRD
f
.a; b/Wa; b2NandaDb1
g
is not, since3R4and4R5
do not imply3R5.
A relation that is reflexive, symmetric, and transitive is anequivalence relation.
For example, “D” is an equivalence relation on the natural numbers, but “<” is not.
IfRis an equivalence relation on a setA, then fora2A,theequivalence class
ofais the setŒaD
f
b2AWaRb
g
, that is, the set of all elements equivalent toa.
For example, if we defineRD
f
.a; b/Wa; b2NandaCbis an even number
g
,
thenRis an equivalence relation,  sinceaCais even (reflexive),aCbis even
impliesbCais even (symmetric),  andaC
bis even andbCcis even imply
aCcis even (transitive).  The equivalence class of4isŒ4D
f
0; 2; 4; 6; : : :
g
,and
the equivalence class of3isŒ3D
f
1; 3; 5; 7; : : :
g
. A basic theorem of equivalence
classes is the following.
Theorem B.1 (An equivalence relation is the same as a partition)
The equivalence classes of any equivalence relationRon a setAform a partition
ofA, and any partition ofAdetermines an equivalence relation onAfor which the
sets in the partition are the equivalence classes.
ProofFor the first part of the proof, we must show that the equivalence classes
ofRare nonempty, pairwise-disjoint sets whose union isA.  BecauseRis reflex-
ive,a2Œa, and so the equivalence classes are nonempty; moreover, since every
elementa2Abelongs to the equivalence classŒa, the union of the equivalence
classes isA.  It remains to show that the equivalence classes are pairwise disjoint,
that is, if two equivalence classesŒaandŒbhave an elementcin common, then
they are in fact the same set. Suppose thataRcandbRc. By symmetry,cRb,
and by transitivity,aRb. Thus, for any arbitrary elementx2Œa,wehavexRa
and,  by  transitivity,xRb,  and  thusŒaŒb.   Similarly,ŒbŒa,  and  thus
ŒaD
Œb.
For the second part of the proof, letAD
f
A
i
g
be a partition ofA, and define
RD
f
.a; b/Wthere existsisuch thata2A
i
andb2A
i
g
.  We claim thatRis an
equivalence relation onA. Reflexivity holds, sincea2A
i
impliesaRa. Symme-
try holds, because ifaRb,thenaandbare in the same setA
i
, and hencebRa.
IfaRbandbRc, then all three elements are in the same setA
i
, and thusaRc
and  transitivity  holds.   To  see  that  the  sets  in  the  partition  are  the  equivalence
classes ofR, observe that ifa2A
i
,thenx2Œaimpliesx2A
i
,andx2A
i
impliesx2Œa.
A binary relationRon a setAisantisymmetricif
aRbandbRaimplyaDb:

B.2    Relations1165
For example, the “” relation on the natural numbers is antisymmetric, sinceab
andbaimplyaDb. A relation that is reflexive, antisymmetric, and transitive
is apartial order, and we call a set on which a partial order is defined apartially
ordered set. For example, the relation “is a descendant of” is a partial order on the
set of all people (if we view individuals as being their own descendants).
In a partially ordered setA, there may be no single “maximum” elementasuch
thatbRafor allb2A. Instead, the set may contain severalmaximalelementsa
such that for nob2A,whereb¤a, is it the case thataRb.  For example, a
collection of different-sized boxes may contain several maximal boxes that don’t
fit inside any other box, yet it has no single “maximum” box into which any other
box will fit.
3
A relationRon a setAis atotal relationif for alla; b2A,wehaveaRb
orbRa(or both),  that is, if every pairing of elements ofAis related byR.A
partial order that is also a total relation is atotal orderorlinear order. For example,
the relation “” is a total order on the natural numbers, but the “is a descendant
of” relation is not a total order on the set of all people, since there are individuals
neither of whom is descended from the other. A total relation that is transitive, but
not necessarily reflexive and antisymmetric, is atotal preorder.
Exercises
B.2-1
Prove that the subset relation “” on all subsets ofZis a partial order but not a
total order.
B.2-2
Show that for any positive integern, the relation “equivalent modulon” is an equiv-
alence relation  on the integers.   (We say thatab.modn/if there exists an
integerqsuch thatabDqn.)  Into what equivalence classes does this relation
partition the integers?
B.2-3
Give examples of relations that are
a.reflexive and symmetric but not transitive,
b.reflexive and transitive but not symmetric,
c.symmetric and transitive but not reflexive.
3
To be precise, in order for the “fit inside” relation to be a partial order, we need to view a box as
fitting inside itself.

1166Appendix BSets, Etc.
B.2-4
LetSbe a finite set, and letRbe an equivalence relation onS	S.  Show that if
in additionRis antisymmetric, then the equivalence classes ofSwith respect toR
are singletons.
B.2-5
Professor Narcissus claims that if a relationRis symmetric and transitive, then it is
also reflexive.  He offers the following proof.  By symmetry,aRbimpliesbRa.
Transitivity, therefore, impliesaRa. Is the professor correct?
B.3  Functions
Given two setsAandB,afunctionfis a binary relation onAandBsuch that
for alla2A, there exists precisely oneb2Bsuch that.a; b/2f.  The setAis
called thedomainoff, and the setBis called thecodomainoff. We sometimes
writefWA!B;andif.a; b/2f, we writebDf.a/,sincebis uniquely
determined by the choice ofa.
Intuitively,  the functionfassigns an element ofBto each element ofA.No
element ofAis assigned two different elements ofB, but the same element ofB
can be assigned to two different elements ofA. For example, the binary relation
fD
f
.a; b/Wa; b2NandbDamod2
g
is a functionfWN!
f
0; 1
g
, since for each natural numbera, there is exactly one
value
bin
f
0; 1
g
such thatbDamod2.  For this example,0Df.0/,1Df.1/,
0Df.2/, etc. In contrast, the binary relation
gD
f
.a; b/Wa; b2NandaCbis even
g
is not a function, since.1; 3/and.1; 5/are both ing, and thus for the choiceaD1,
there is not precisely onebsuch that.a; b/2g.
Given a functionfWA!B,ifbDf.a/, we say thatais theargumentoff
and thatbis thevalueoffata.  We can define a function by stating its value for
every element of its domain. For example, we might definef .n/D2nforn2N,
which meansfD
f
.n; 2n/Wn2N
g
.  Two functions
fandgareequalif they
have the same domain and codomain and if, for allain the domain,f.a/Dg.a/.
Afinite sequenceof  lengthnis  a  functionfwhose  domain  is  the  set  ofn
integers
f
0; 1; : : : ; n1
g
.  We often denote a finite sequence by listing its values:
hf.0/;f.1/;:::;f.n1/i.Aninfinite sequenceis a function whose domain is
the setNof natural numbers.  For example,  the Fibonacci sequence,  defined by
recurrence (3.22), is the infinite sequenceh0; 1; 1; 2; 3; 5; 8; 13; 21; : : :i.

B.3    Functions1167
When the domain of a functionfis a Cartesian product, we often omit the extra
parentheses  surrounding  the argument  off.  For example,  if we had a function
fWA
1
	A
2
		A
n
!B,  we would writebDf.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
/instead
ofbDf ..a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
//.  We also call eacha
i
anargumentto the functionf,
though technically the (single) argument tofis then-tuple.a
1
;a
2
;:::;a
n
/.
IffWA!Bis a function andbDf.a/, then we sometimes say thatbis the
imageofaunderf. The image of a setA
0
Aunderfis defined by
f.A
0
/D
f
b2BWbDf.a/for somea2A
0
g
:
Therangeoffis the image of its domain, that is,f.A/.  For example, the range
of the functionfWN!Ndefined byf .n/D2nisf.N/D
f
mWmD2nfor
somen2N
g
, in other words, the set of nonnegative even integers.
A function is asurjectionif its range is its codomain. For example, the function
f .n/D
b
n=2
c
is a surjective  function fromNtoN,  since every element inN
appears as the value offfor some argument. In contrast, the functionf .n/D2n
is not a surjective function fromNtoN, since no argument tofcan produce3as a
value. The functionf .n/D2nis, however, a surjective function from the natural
numbers to the even numbers. A surjectionfWA!Bis sometimes described as
mappingAontoB. When we say thatfis onto, we mean that it is surjective.
A  functionfWA!Bis  aninjectionif  distinct  arguments  tofproduce
distinct values, that is, ifa¤a
0
impliesf.a/¤f.a
0
/. For example, the function
f .n/D2nis an injective function fromNtoN, since each even numberbis the
image underfof at most one element of the domain, namelyb=2.  The function
f .n/D
b
n=2
c
is not injective, since the value1is produced by two arguments:2
and3. An injection is sometimes called aone-to-onefunction.
A functionfWA!Bis abijectionif it is injective and surjective. For example,
the functionf .n/D.1/
n
d
n=2
e
is a bijection fromNtoZ:
0!0;
1!1;
2!1;
3!2;
4!2;
:
:
:
The function  is injective,  since  no element  ofZis the image  of  more than one
element ofN.  It is surjective,  since every element ofZappears as the image of
some element  ofN.  Hence,  the function  is bijective.   A bijection  is sometimes
called  aone-to-one correspondence,  since  it  pairs  elements  in  the  domain  and
codomain. A bijection from a setAto itself is sometimes called apermutation.
When a functionfis bijective, we define itsinversef
1
as
f
1
.b/Daif and only iff.a/Db:

1168Appendix BSets, Etc.
For example, the inverse of the functionf .n/D.1/
n
d
n=2
e
is
f
1
.m/D
(
2mifm0;
2m1ifm<0:
Exercises
B.3-1
LetAandBbe finite sets, and letfWA!Bbe a function. Show that
a.iffis injective, then
j
A
j

j
B
j
;
b.iffis surjective, then
j
A
j

j
B
j
.
B.3-2
Is the functionf.x/DxC1bijective when the domain and the codomain areN?
Is it bijective when the domain and the codomain areZ?
B.3-3
Give a natural definition for the inverse of a binary relation such that if a relation
is in fact a bijective function, its relational inverse is its functional inverse.
B.3-4?
Give a bijection fromZtoZ	Z.
B.4  Graphs
This section presents two kinds of graphs:  directed and undirected.  Certain def-
initions  in the  literature  differ  from  those  given  here,  but  for the  most  part,  the
differences are slight.  Section 22.1 shows how we can represent graphs in com-
puter memory.
Adirected graph(ordigraph)Gisapair.V; E/,whereVis a finite set andE
is a binary relation onV. The setVis called thevertex setofG, and its elements
are calledvertices(singular:vertex). The setEis called theedge setofG, and its
elements are callededges.  Figure B.2(a) is a pictorial representation of a directed
graph on the vertex set
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
.  Vertices are represented by circles in the
figure, and edges are represented by arrows.  Note thatself-loops—edges  from a
vertex to itself—are possible.
In  anundirected graphGD.V; E/,  the  edge  setEconsists  ofunordered
pairs of vertices, rather than ordered pairs.  That is, an edge is a set
f
u; 
g
,where

B.4    Graphs1169
123
456
(a)
123
456
(b)
123
6
(c)
Figure B.2Directed  and  undirected  graphs.(a)A  directed  graphGD.V; E/,whereVD
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
andEDf.1; 2/; .2; 2/; .2; 4/; .2; 5/; .4; 1/; .4; 5/; .5; 4/; .6; 3/g.   The  edge.2; 2/
is  a  self-loop.(b)An  undirected  graphGD.V; E/,whereVD
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
andED
f
.1; 2/; .1; 5/; .2; 5/; .3; 6/
g
.Thevertex4is  isolated.(c)The  subgraph  of  the  graph  in  part  (a)
induced by the vertex set
f
1; 2; 3; 6
g
.
u; 2Vandu¤. By convention, we use the notation.u; /for an edge, rather
than the set notation
f
u; 
g
, and we consider.u; /and.; u/to be the same edge.
In an undirected graph, self-loops are forbidden, and so every edge consists of two
distinct vertices.  Figure B.2(b) is a pictorial representation of an undirected graph
on the vertex set
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
.
Many definitions for directed and undirected graphs are the same, although cer-
tain terms have slightly different meanings in the two contexts. If.u; /is an edge
in  a directed  graphGD.V; E/,  we  say  that.u; /isincident fromorleaves
vertexuand isincident toorentersvertex. For example, the edges leaving ver-
tex2in Figure B.2(a) are.2; 2/,.2; 4/,and.2; 5/. The edges entering vertex2are
.1; 2/and.2; 2/.If.u; /is an edge in an undirected graphGD.V; E/, we say
that.u; /isincident onverticesuand. In Figure B.2(b), the edges incident on
vertex2are.1; 2/and.2; 5/.
If.u; /is an edge in a graphGD.V; E/, we say that vertexisadjacentto
vertexu. When the graph is undirected, the adjacency relation is symmetric. When
the graph is directed, the adjacency relation is not necessarily symmetric.  Ifis
adjacent touin a directed graph, we sometimes writeu!.  In parts (a) and (b)
of Figure B.2, vertex2is adjacent to vertex1, since the edge.1; 2/belongs to both
graphs.  Vertex1isnotadjacent to vertex2in Figure B.2(a), since the edge.2; 1/
does not belong to the graph.
Thedegreeof a vertex in an undirected graph is the number of edges incident on
it. For example, vertex2in Figure B.2(b) has degree2. A vertex whose degree is0,
such as vertex4in Figure B.2(b), isisolated.  In a directed graph, theout-degree
of a vertex is the number of edges leaving it, and thein-degreeofavertexisthe
number of edges entering it.  Thedegreeof a vertex in a directed graph is its in-

1170Appendix BSets, Etc.
degree plus its out-degree. Vertex2in Figure B.2(a) has in-degree2, out-degree3,
and degree5.
Apathoflengthkfrom  a  vertexuto  a  vertexu
0
in  a  graphGD.V; E/
is  a sequenceh
0
;
1
;
2
; :::; 
k
iof  vertices  such  thatuD
0
,u
0
D
k
,and
.
i1
;
i
/2EforiD1;2;:::;k.   The  length  of  the  path  is  the  number  of
edges  in  the  path.   The  pathcontainsthe  vertices
0
;
1
;:::;
k
and  the  edges
.
0
;
1
/; .
1
;
2
/;:::;.
k1
;
k
/. (Thereisalwaysa0-length path fromutou.)  If
there is a pathpfromutou
0
, we say thatu
0
isreachablefromuviap,whichwe
sometimes write asu
p
u
0
ifGis directed.  A path issimple
4
if all vertices in the
path are distinct. In Figure B.2(a), the pathh1; 2; 5; 4iis a simple path of length3.
The pathh2; 5; 4; 5iis not simple.
Asubpathof pathpDh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
iis a contiguous subsequence of its ver-
tices. That is, for any0ijk, the subsequence of verticesh
i
;
iC1
;:::;
j
i
is a subpath ofp.
In a directed graph,  a pathh
0
;
1
; :::; 
k
iforms acycleif
0
D
k
and the
path contains at least one edge.  The cycle issimpleif, in addition,
1
;
2
;:::;
k
are distinct. A self-loop is a cycle of length1.Twopathsh
0
;
1
;
2
;:::;
k1
;
0
i
andh
0
0
;
0
1
;
0
2
;:::;
0
k1
;
0
0
iform the same cycle if there exists an integerjsuch
that
0
i
D
.iCj/modk
foriD0; 1; : : : ; k1. In Figure B.2(a), the pathh1; 2; 4; 1i
forms the same cycle as the pathsh2; 4; 1; 2iandh4; 1; 2; 4i. This cycle is simple,
but the cycleh1; 2; 4; 5; 4; 1iis not.  The cycleh2; 2iformed by the edge.2; 2/is
a self-loop.  A directed graph with no self-loops issimple. In an undirected graph,
apathh
0
;
1
;:::;
k
iforms acycleifk3and
0
D
k
;thecycleissimpleif

1
;
2
;:::;
k
are distinct.  For example, in Figure B.2(b), the pathh1; 2; 5; 1iis a
simple cycle. A graph with no cycles isacyclic.
An  undirected  graph  isconnectedif  every  vertex  is  reachable  from  all  other
vertices.   Theconnected componentsof  a  graph  are  the  equivalence  classes  of
vertices  under  the “is reachable  from” relation.   The graph  in Figure B.2(b) has
three connected components:
f
1; 2; 5
g
,
f
3; 6
g
,and
f
4
g
.  Every vertex in
f
1; 2; 5
g
is
reachable from every other vertex in
f
1; 2; 5
g
.  An undirected graph is connected
if it has exactly one connected component.  The edges of a connected component
are those that are incident on only the vertices of the component; in other words,
edge.u; /is an edge of a connected component only if bothuandare vertices
of the component.
A directed graph isstrongly connectedif every two vertices are reachable from
each other. Thestrongly connected componentsof a directed graph are the equiv-
4
Some authors refer to what we call a path as a “walk” and to what we call a simple path as just a
“path.” We use the terms “path” and “simple path” throughout this book in a manner consistent with
their definitions.

B.4    Graphs1171
12
3
45
6
uvwxyz
(a)
12
3
4
5
uvwxy
(b)
G
G′
Figure B.3  (a)A  pair  of  isomorphic  graphs.   The  vertices  of  the  top  graph  are  mapped  to the
vertices of the bottom graph byf.1/Du; f .2/D; f .3/Dw; f .4/Dx; f .5/Dy; f .6/D ́.
(b)Two graphs that are not isomorphic, since the top graph has a vertex of degree 4 and the bottom
graph does not.
alence classes of vertices under the “are mutually reachable” relation.  A directed
graph is strongly connected if it has only one strongly connected component.  The
graph in Figure B.2(a) has three strongly connected components:
f
1; 2; 4; 5
g
,
f
3
g
,
and
f
6
g
.   All  pairs  of  vertices  in
f
1; 2; 4; 5
g
are  mutually  reachable.   The  ver-
tices
f
3; 6
g
do not  form  a strongly  connected  component,  since  vertex6cannot
be reached from vertex3.
Two graphsGD.V; E/andG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/areisomorphicif there exists a
bijectionfWV!V
0
such that.u; /2Eif and only if.f .u/; f .//2E
0
.
In other  words,  we can relabel  the vertices ofGto be vertices ofG
0
,  maintain-
ing  the  corresponding  edges  inGandG
0
.   Figure  B.3(a)  shows  a  pair  of  iso-
morphic  graphsGandG
0
with respective  vertex setsVD
f
1; 2; 3; 4; 5; 6
g
and
V
0
D
f
u; ; w; x; y;  ́
g
. The mapping fromVtoV
0
given byf.1/Du; f .2/D;
f.3/Dw; f .4/Dx; f .5/Dy; f .6/D ́provides the required bijective func-
tion.  The graphs in Figure B.3(b) are not isomorphic.  Although both graphs have
5vertices and7edges, the top graph has a vertex of degree4and the bottom graph
does not.
We say that a graphG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/is asubgraphofGD.V; E/ifV
0
V
andE
0
E.  Given a setV
0
V, the subgraph ofGinducedbyV
0
is the graph
G
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/,where
E
0
D
f
.u; /2EWu; 2V
0
g
:

1172Appendix BSets, Etc.
The  subgraph  induced  by  the  vertex  set
f
1; 2; 3; 6
g
in  Figure  B.2(a)  appears  in
Figure B.2(c) and has the edge set
f
.1; 2/; .2; 2/; .6; 3/
g
.
Given an undirected graphGD.V; E/,thedirected versionofGis the directed
graphG
0
D.V; E
0
/,where.u; /2E
0
if and only if.u; /2E.Thatis,we
replace each undirected edge.u; /inGby the two directed edges.u; /and.; u/
in the directed version. Given a directed graphGD.V; E/,theundirected version
ofGis the undirected graphG
0
D.V; E
0
/,where.u; /2E
0
if and only ifu¤
and.u; /2E.   That is,  the undirected  version  contains  the edges ofG“with
their directions removed” and with self-loops eliminated.  (Since.u; /and.; u/
are  the  same  edge  in  an  undirected  graph,  the  undirected  version  of  a  directed
graph contains it only once, even if the directed graph contains both edges.u; /
and.; u/.) In a directed graphGD.V; E/,aneighborof a vertexuis any vertex
that is adjacent touin the undirected version ofG.Thatis,is a neighbor ofuif
u¤and either.u; /2Eor.; u/2E.  In an undirected graph,uandare
neighbors if they are adjacent.
Several kinds of graphs have special names. Acomplete graphis an undirected
graph in which every pair of vertices is adjacent. Abipartite graphis an undirected
graphGD.V; E/in whichVcan be partitioned into two setsV
1
andV
2
such that
.u; /2Eimplies eitheru2V
1
and2V
2
oru2V
2
and2V
1
.  That is, all
edges go between the two setsV
1
andV
2
. An acyclic, undirected graph is aforest,
and a connected, acyclic, undirected graph is a(free) tree(see Section B.5).  We
often take the first letters of “directed acyclic graph” and call such a graph adag.
There are two variants of graphs that you may occasionally encounter. Amulti-
graphis like an undirected graph, but it can have both multiple edges between ver-
tices and self-loops. Ahypergraphis like an undirected graph, but eachhyperedge,
rather than connecting two vertices, connects an arbitrary subset of vertices. Many
algorithms written for ordinary directed and undirected graphs can be adapted to
run on these graphlike structures.
Thecontractionof an undirected graphGD.V; E/by an edgeeD.u; /is a
graphG
0
D.V
0
;E
0
/,whereV
0
DV
f
u; 
g
[
f
x
g
andxis a new vertex. The set
of edgesE
0
is formed fromEby deleting the edge.u; /and, for each vertexw
incident onuor, deleting whichever of.u; w/and.; w/is inEand adding the
new edge.x; w/. In effect,uandare “contracted” into a single vertex.
Exercises
B.4-1
Attendees of a faculty party shake hands to greet each other,  and each professor
remembers how many times he or she shook hands.  At the end of the party, the
department  head  adds  up the  number  of  times that  each  professor  shook  hands.

B.5    Trees1173
Show that the result is even by proving thehandshaking lemma:ifGD.V; E/is
an undirected graph, then
X
2V
degree./D2
j
E
j
:
B.4-2
Show that if a directed or undirected graph contains a path between two verticesu
and, then it contains a simple path betweenuand. Show that if a directed graph
contains a cycle, then it contains a simple cycle.
B.4-3
Show that any connected, undirected graphGD.V; E/satisfies
j
E
j

j
V
j
1.
B.4-4
Verify that in an undirected  graph,  the “is reachable  from” relation  is an equiv-
alence relation on the vertices of the graph.  Which of the three properties of an
equivalence  relation  hold  in  general  for  the  “is  reachable  from”  relation  on  the
vertices of a directed graph?
B.4-5
What is the undirected version of the directed graph in Figure B.2(a)? What is the
directed version of the undirected graph in Figure B.2(b)?
B.4-6?
Show that we can represent a hypergraph by a bipartite graph if we let incidence in
the hypergraph correspond to adjacency in the bipartite graph.  (Hint:Let one set
of vertices in the bipartite graph correspond to vertices of the hypergraph, and let
the other set of vertices of the bipartite graph correspond to hyperedges.)
B.5  Trees
As with graphs, there are many related, but slightly different, notions of trees. This
section presents definitions and mathematical properties of several kinds of trees.
Sections 10.4 and 22.1 describe how we can represent trees in computer memory.
B.5.1  Free trees
As defined in Section B.4, afree treeis a connected, acyclic, undirected graph. We
often omit the adjective “free” when we say that a graph is a tree. If an undirected
graph is acyclic but possibly disconnected, it is aforest. Many algorithms that work

1174Appendix BSets, Etc.
(a)(b)(c)
Figure B.4  (a)A free tree.(b)Aforest.(c)A graph that contains a cycle and is therefore neither
atreenoraforest.
for trees also work for forests.  Figure B.4(a) shows a free tree, and Figure B.4(b)
shows a forest. The forest in Figure B.4(b) is not a tree because it is not connected.
The graph in Figure B.4(c) is connected but neither a tree nor a forest, because it
contains a cycle.
The following theorem captures many important facts about free trees.
Theorem B.2 (Properties of free trees)
LetGD.V; E/be an undirected graph. The following statements are equivalent.
1.Gis a free tree.
2.   Any two vertices inGare connected by a unique simple path.
3.Gis connected, but if any edge is removed fromE, the resulting graph is dis-
connected.
4.Gis connected, and
j
E
j
D
j
V
j
1.
5.Gis acyclic, and
j
E
j
D
j
V
j
1.
6.Gis acyclic, but if any edge is added toE, the resulting graph contains a cycle.
Proof(1))(2): Since a tree is connected, any two vertices inGare connected
by at least one simple path.  Suppose, for the sake of contradiction, that verticesu
andare connected by two distinct simple pathsp
1
andp
2
, as shown in Figure B.5.
Letwbe the vertex at which the paths first diverge;  that is,wis the first vertex
on bothp
1
andp
2
whose successor onp
1
isxand whose successor onp
2
isy,
wherex¤y.Let ́be the first vertex at which the paths reconverge; that is, ́is
the first vertex followingwonp
1
that is also onp
2
.Letp
0
be the subpath ofp
1
fromwthroughxto ́,andletp
00
be the subpath ofp
2
fromwthroughyto ́.
Pathsp
0
andp
00
share no vertices except their endpoints. Thus, the path obtained by
concatenatingp
0
and the reverse ofp
00
is a cycle, which contradicts our assumption

B.5    Trees1175
u
w
z
v
x
y
p′
p′′
Figure B.5A step in the proof of Theorem B.2:  if (1)Gis a free tree, then (2) any two vertices
inGare connected by a unique simple path.  Assume for the sake of contradiction that verticesu
andare connected by two distinct simple pathsp
1
andp
2
.  These paths first diverge at vertexw,
and they first reconverge at vertex ́. The pathp
0
concatenated with the reverse of the pathp
00
forms
a cycle, which yields the contradiction.
thatGis a tree. Thus, ifGis a tree, there can be at most one simple path between
two vertices.
(2))(3):  If any  two  vertices  inGare  connected  by  a unique  simple  path,
thenGis connected. Let.u; /be any edge inE. This edge is a path fromuto,
and so it must be the unique path fromuto.  If we remove.u; /fromG,there
is no path fromuto, and hence its removal disconnectsG.
(3))(4): By assumption, the graphGis connected, and by Exercise B.4-3, we
have
j
E
j

j
V
j
1.  We shall prove
j
E
j

j
V
j
1by induction.  A connected
graph withnD1ornD2vertices hasn1edges.  Suppose thatGhasn3
vertices and that all graphs satisfying  (3) with fewer thannvertices also satisfy
j
E
j

j
V
j
1. Removing an arbitrary edge fromGseparates the graph intok2
connected components (actually
kD2).  Each component satisfies (3), or elseG
would not satisfy (3). If we view each connected componentV
i
, with edge setE
i
,
as its own free tree, then because each component has fewer than
j
V
j
vertices, by
the inductive hypothesis we have
j
E
i
j

j
V
i
j
1. Thus, the number of edges in all
components combined is at most
j
V
j
k
j
V
j
2. Adding in the removed edge
yields
j
E
j

j
V
j
1.
(4))(5): Suppose thatGis connected and that
j
E
j
D
j
V
j
1. We must show
thatGis acyclic.  Suppose thatGhas a cycle containingkvertices
1
;
2
;:::;
k
,
and without loss of generality assume that this cycle is simple. LetG
k
D.V
k
;E
k
/
be  the  subgraph  ofGconsisting  of  the  cycle.   Note  that
j
V
k
j
D
j
E
k
j
Dk.
Ifk<
j
V
j
, there must be a vertex
kC1
2VV
k
that is adjacent  to some ver-
tex
i
2V
k
,sinceGis connected.  DefineG
kC1
D.V
kC1
;E
kC1
/to be the sub-
graph ofGwithV
kC1
DV
k
[
f

kC1
g
andE
kC1
DE
k
[
f
.
i
;
kC1
/
g
.  Note that
j
V
kC1
j
D
j
E
kC1
j
DkC1.IfkC1<
j
V
j
, we can continue, definingG
kC2
in
the same manner, and so forth, until we obtainG
n
D.V
n
;E
n
/,wherenD
j
V
j
,

1176Appendix BSets, Etc.
V
n
DV,and
j
E
n
j
D
j
V
n
j
D
j
V
j
.SinceG
n
is a subgraph ofG,wehaveE
n
E,
and hence
j
E
j

j
V
j
, which contradicts the assumption that
j
E
j
D
j
V
j
1. Thus,
Gis acyclic.
(5))(6):  Suppose thatGis acyclic and that
j
E
j
D
j
V
j
1.Letkbe the
number of connected components ofG.  Each connected component is a free tree
by definition, and since (1) implies (5), the sum of all edges in all connected com-
ponents ofGis
j
V
j
k.  Consequently, we must havekD1,andGis in fact a
tree. Since (1) implies (2), any two vertices inGare connected by a unique simple
path. Thus, adding any edge toGcreates a cycle.
(6))(1):  Suppose thatGis acyclic but that adding any edge toEcreates a
cycle.  We must show thatGis connected.  Letuandbe arbitrary vertices inG.
Ifuandare not already adjacent, adding the edge.u; /creates a cycle in which
all edges but.u; /belong toG. Thus, the cycle minus edge.u; /must contain a
path fromuto, and sinceu
andwere chosen arbitrarily,Gis connected.
B.5.2  Rooted and ordered trees
Arooted treeis a free tree in which one of the vertices is distinguished from the
others.  We call the distinguished vertex therootof the tree.  We often refer to a
vertex of a rooted tree as anode
5
of the tree. Figure B.6(a) shows a rooted tree on
a set of12nodes with root7.
Consider a nodexin a rooted treeTwith rootr.  We call any nodeyon the
unique simple path fromrtoxanancestorofx.Ifyis an ancestor ofx,thenxis
adescendantofy. (Every node is both an ancestor and a descendant of itself.) Ify
is an ancestor ofxandx¤y,thenyis aproper ancestorofxandxis aproper
descendantofy.Thesubtree rooted atxis the tree induced by descendants ofx,
rooted atx.  For example, the subtree rooted at node8in Figure B.6(a) contains
nodes8,6,5,and9.
If the last edge on the simple path from the rootrof a treeTto a nodexis.y; x/,
thenyis theparentofx,andxis achildofy. The root is the only node inTwith
no parent.  If two nodes have the same parent, they aresiblings
.  A node with no
children is aleaforexternal node. A nonleaf node is aninternal node.
5
The term “node” is often used in the graph theory literature as a synonym for “vertex.” We reserve
the term “node” to mean a vertex of a rooted tree.

B.5    Trees1177
9
65
8
1
12
310
7
112
4
height = 4
depth 0
depth 1
depth 2
depth 3
depth 4
(a)
9
65
812
310
7
112
4
(b)
1
Figure B.6Rooted and  ordered  trees.(a)A rooted tree  with height4.   The tree is drawn in a
standard way:  the root (node7) is at the top, its children (nodes with depth1) are beneath it, their
children (nodes with depth2) are beneath them, and so forth. If the tree is ordered, the relative left-
to-right order of the children of a node matters; otherwise it doesn’t.(b)Another rooted tree.  As a
rooted tree, it is identical to the tree in (a), but as an ordered tree it is different, since the children of
node3appear in a different order.
The number of children of a nodexin a rooted treeTequals thedegreeofx.
6
The length of the simple path from the rootrto a nodexis thedepthofxinT.
Alevelof a tree consists of all nodes at the same depth. Theheightof a node in a
tree is the number of edges on the longest simple downward path from the node to
a leaf, and the height of a tree is the height of its root.  The height of a tree is also
equal to the largest depth of any node in the tree.
Anordered treeis a rooted tree in which the children of each node are ordered.
That is,  if a node haskchildren, then there is a first child, a second child, ...,
and akth child.  The two trees in Figure B.6 are different when considered to be
ordered trees, but the same when considered to be just rooted trees.
B.5.3  Binary and positional trees
We define binary trees recursively. Abinary treeTis a structure defined on a finite
set of nodes that either

contains no nodes, or
6
Notice that the degree of a node depends on whether we considerTto be a rooted tree or a free tree.
The degree of a vertex in a free tree is, as in any undirected graph, the number of adjacent vertices.
In a rooted tree, however, the degree is the number of children—the parent of a node does not count
toward its degree.

1178Appendix BSets, Etc.
3
2
41
6
7
5
(a)
3
2
41
6
7
5
(b)
3
2
41
6
7
5
(c)
Figure B.7Binary trees.(a)A binary tree drawn in a standard way.  The left child of a node is
drawn beneath the node and to the left. The right child is drawn beneath and to the right.(b)Abinary
tree different from the one in (a).  In (a), the left child of node7is5and the right child is absent.
In (b), the left child of node7is absent and the right child is5.  As ordered trees, these trees are
the same, but as binary trees, they are distinct.(c)The binary tree in (a) represented by the internal
nodes of a full binary tree:  an ordered tree in which each internal node has degree2.  The leaves in
the tree are shown as squares.

is composed of three disjoint sets of nodes: arootnode, a binary tree called its
left subtree, and a binary tree called itsright subtree.
The binary tree that contains no nodes is called theempty treeornull tree,some-
times denoted
NIL. If the left subtree is nonempty, its root is called theleft childof
the root of the entire tree. Likewise, the root of a nonnull right subtree is theright
childof the root of the entire tree.  If a subtree is the null tree
NIL, we say that the
child isabsentormissing. Figure B.7(a) shows a binary tree.
A binary tree is not simply an ordered tree in which each node has degree at
most2.  For example,  in a binary tree,  if a node has just one child,  the position
of  the  child—whether  it  is theleft childor  theright child—matters.   In an  or-
dered tree, there is no distinguishing a sole child as being either left or right.  Fig-
ure B.7(b) shows a binary tree that differs from the tree in Figure B.7(a) because of
the position of one node.  Considered as ordered trees, however, the two trees are
identical.
We can  represent  the  positioning  information  in  a  binary  tree  by  the  internal
nodes of an ordered tree, as shown in Figure B.7(c).  The idea is to replace each
missing child in the binary tree with a node having no children.  These leaf nodes
are drawn as squares in the figure.  The tree that results is afull binary tree:  each
node is either a leaf or has degree exactly2. There are no degree-1nodes.  Conse-
quently, the order of the children of a node preserves the position information.
We can extend the positioning information that distinguishes binary trees from
ordered trees to trees with more than2children per node.  In apositional tree,the

B.5    Trees1179
height = 3
depth 0
depth 1
depth 2
depth 3
Figure B.8A complete binary tree of height3with8leaves and7internal nodes.
children of a node are labeled with distinct positive integers.  Theith child of a
node isabsentif no child is labeled with integeri.Ak-arytree is a positional tree
in which for every node, all children with labels greater thankare missing.  Thus,
a binary tree is ak-ary tree withkD2.
Acompletek-ary treeis ak-ary tree in which all leaves have the same depth
and all internal nodes have degreek.  Figure B.8 shows a complete binary tree of
height3. How many leaves does a completek-ary tree of heighthhave? The root
haskchildren at depth1, each of which haskchildren at depth2, etc.  Thus, the
number of leaves at depthhisk
h
.  Consequently,  the height of a completek-ary
tree withnleaves is log
k
n. The number of internal nodes of a completek-ary tree
of heighthis
1CkCk
2
CCk
h1
D
h1
X
iD0
k
i
D
k
h
1
k1
by equation (A.5). Thus, a complete binary tree has2
h
1internal nodes.
Exercises
B.5-1
Draw all the free trees composed of the three verticesx,y,and ́.  Draw all the
rooted trees with nodesx,y,and ́withxas the root.  Draw all the ordered trees
with nodesx,y,and ́withxas the root.  Draw all the binary trees with nodesx,
y,and ́withxas the root.

1180Appendix BSets, Etc.
B.5-2
LetGD.V; E/be a directed  acyclic graph in which there is a vertex
0
2V
such that there exists a unique path from
0
to every vertex2V.  Prove that the
undirected version ofGforms a tree.
B.5-3
Show by induction that the number of degree-2nodes in any nonempty binary tree
is1fewer than the number of leaves.  Conclude that the number of internal nodes
in a full binary tree is1fewer than the number of leaves.
B.5-4
Use  induction  to  show  that  a  nonempty  binary  tree  withnnodes  has  height  at
least
b
lgn
c
.
B.5-5?
Theinternal path lengthof a full binary tree is the sum, taken over all internal
nodes of the tree, of the depth of each node. Likewise, theexternal path lengthis
the sum, taken over all leaves of the tree, of the depth of each leaf. Consider a full
binary tree withninternal nodes, internal path lengthi, and external path lengthe.
Prove thateDiC2n.
B.5-6?
Let us associate a “weight”w.x/D2
d
with each leafxof depthdin a binary
treeT,andletLbe the set of leaves ofT.  Prove that
P
x2L
w.x/1.  (This is
known as theKraft inequality.)
B.5-7?
Show that ifL2, then every binary tree withLleaves contains a subtree having
betweenL=3and2L=3leaves, inclusive.
Problems
B-1  Graph coloring
Given an undirected graphGD.V; E/,ak-coloringofGis a functioncWV!
f
0; 1; : : : ; k1
g
such thatc.u/¤c./for every edge.u; /2E. In other words,
the numbers0; 1; : : : ; k1represent thekcolors, and adjacent vertices must have
different colors.
a.Show that any tree is2-colorable.

Problems for Appendix B1181
b.Show that the following are equivalent:
1.Gis bipartite.
2.Gis2-colorable.
3.Ghas no cycles of odd length.
c.Letdbe the maximum degree of any vertex in a graphG.  Prove that we can
colorGwithdC1colors.
d.Show that ifGhasO.
j
V
j
/edges, then we can colorGwithO.
p
j
V
j
/colors.
B-2  Friendly graphs
Reword each of the following statements  as a theorem  about  undirected  graphs,
and then prove it. Assume that friendship is symmetric but not reflexive.
a.Any group of at least two people contains at least two people with the same
number of friends in the group.
b.Every group of six people contains either at least three mutual friends or at least
three mutual strangers.
c.Any group of people can be partitioned into two subgroups such that at least
half the friends of each person belong to the subgroup of which that person is
notamember.
d.If everyone in a group is the friend of at least half the people in the group, then
the group can be seated around a table in such a way that everyone is seated
between two friends.
B-3  Bisecting trees
Many divide-and-conquer algorithms that operate on graphs require that the graph
be bisected into two nearly equal-sized subgraphs, which are induced by a partition
of the vertices. This problem investigates bisections of trees formed by removing a
small number of edges. We require that whenever two vertices end up in the same
subtree after removing edges, then they must be in the same partition.
a.Show that  we can  partition  the  vertices  of anyn-vertex  binary  tree into  two
setsAandB, such that
j
A
j
3n=4and
j
B
j
3n=4,byremovingasingle
edge.
b.Show that the constant3=4in part (a) is optimal in the worst case by giving
an example of a simple binary tree whose most evenly balanced partition upon
removal of a single edge has
j
A
j
D3n=4.

1182Appendix BSets, Etc.
c.Show that  by removing  at  mostO.lgn/edges,  we can partition  the vertices
of  anyn-vertex  binary  tree  into  two  setsAandBsuch  that
j
A
j
D
b
n=2
c
and
j
B
j
D
d
n=2
e
.
Appendix notes
G. Boole pioneered the development of symbolic logic, and he introduced many of
the basic set notations in a book published in 1854. Modern set theory was created
by G. Cantor during the period 1874–1895.  Cantor focused primarily on sets of
infinite cardinality. The term “function” is attributed to G. W. Leibniz, who used it
to refer to several kinds of mathematical formulas. His limited definition has been
generalized many times.  Graph theory originated in 1736, when L. Euler proved
that it was impossible to cross each of the seven bridges in the city of K  ̈onigsberg
exactly once and return to the starting point.
The book by Harary [160] provides a useful compendium of many definitions
and results from graph theory.

CCounting and Probability
This appendix  reviews elementary  combinatorics  and probability  theory.   If you
have a good background in these areas, you may want to skim the beginning of this
appendix lightly and concentrate on the later sections. Most of this book’s chapters
do not require probability, but for some chapters it is essential.
Section C.1 reviews elementary  results in counting  theory,  including  standard
formulas for counting permutations and combinations.  The axioms of probability
and  basic  facts  concerning  probability  distributions  form  Section  C.2.   Random
variables are introduced  in Section C.3, along with the properties of expectation
and variance.   Section  C.4 investigates  the geometric  and  binomial  distributions
that arise from studying  Bernoulli trials.   The study of the binomial distribution
continues in Section C.5, an advanced discussion of the “tails” of the distribution.
C.1  Counting
Counting theory tries to answer the question “How many?”  without actually enu-
merating all the choices.  For example, we might ask, “How many differentn-bit
numbers are there?” or  “How many orderings ofndistinct elements are there?” In
this section, we review the elements of counting theory. Since some of the material
assumes a basic understanding  of sets,  you might wish to start by reviewing the
material in Section B.1.
Rules of sum and product
We can sometimes express a set of items that we wish to count as a union of disjoint
sets or as a Cartesian product of sets.
Therule of sumsays that the number of ways to choose one element from one
of twodisjointsets is the sum of the cardinalities of the sets.  That is, ifAandB
are two finite sets with no members in common, then
j
A[B
j
D
j
A
j
C
j
B
j
,which

1184Appendix CCounting and Probability
follows from equation (B.3).  For example, each position on a car’s license plate
is  a  letter  or  a  digit.   The number  of  possibilities  for  each  position  is  therefore
26C10D36, since there are 26 choices if it is a letter and 10 choices if it is a
digit.
Therule of productsays that the number of ways to choose an ordered pair is the
number of ways to choose the first element times the number of ways to choose the
second element.  That is, ifAandBare two finite sets, then
j
A	B
j
D
j
A
j

j
B
j
,
which  is  simply  equation  (B.4).   For  example,  if  an  ice-cream  parlor  offers  28
flavors of ice cream and 4 toppings, the number of possible sundaes with one scoop
of ice cream and one topping is284D112.
Strings
Astringover a finite setSis a sequence of elements ofS. For example, there are 8
binary strings of length3:
000; 001; 010; 011; 100; 101; 110; 111 :
We sometimes call a string  of lengthkak-string.Asubstrings
0
of a strings
is an ordered  sequence  of consecutive  elements  ofs.Ak-substringof a string
is a substring  of  lengthk.   For example,010is a3-substring  of01101001(the
3-substring that begins in position 4), but111is not a substring of01101001.
We can view ak-string over a setSas an element of the Cartesian productS
k
ofk-tuples; thus, there are
j
S
j
k
strings of lengthk.  For example, the number of
binaryk-strings is2
k
.  Intuitively, to construct ak-string over ann-set, we haven
ways to pick the first element; for each of these choices, we havenways to pick the
second element; and so forthktimes. This construction leads to thek-fold product
nnnDn
k
as the number ofk-strings.
Permutations
Apermutationof a finite setSis an ordered sequence of all the elements ofS,
with each element appearing exactly once.  For example, ifSD
f
a; b; c
g
,thenS
has6permutations:
abc; acb; bac; bca; cab; cba :
There arenŠpermutations  of  a set  ofnelements,  since  we can choose  the  first
element of the sequence innways, the second inn1ways, the third inn2
ways, and so on.
Ak-permutationofSis an ordered sequence ofkelements ofS, with no ele-
ment appearing more than once in the sequence. (Thus, an ordinary permutation is
ann-permutation of ann-set.) The twelve2-permutations of the set
f
a; b; c; d
g
are

C.1    Counting1185
ab;ac;ad;ba;bc;bd;ca;cb;cd;da;db;dc :
The number ofk-permutations of ann-set is
n.n1/.n2/.nkC1/D
nŠ
.nk/Š
;(C.1)
since we havenways to choose the first element,n1ways to choose the second
element, and so on, until we have selectedkelements, the last being a selection
from the remainingnkC1elements.
Combinations
Ak-combinationof ann-setSis simply ak-subset ofS.  For example, the4-set
f
a; b; c; d
g
has six2-combinations:
ab; ac; ad; bc; bd; cd :
(Here  we  use  the  shorthand  of  denoting  the2-subset
f
a; b
g
byab,  and  so  on.)
We can construct  ak-combination  of ann-set by choosingkdistinct (different)
elements from then-set. The order in which we select the elements does not matter.
We can express the number ofk-combinations of ann-set in terms of the number
ofk-permutations of ann-set.  Everyk-combination has exactlykŠpermutations
of its elements, each of which is a distinctk-permutation of then-set.  Thus, the
number  ofk-combinations  of  ann-set  is the number  ofk-permutations  divided
bykŠ; from equation (C.1), this quantity is
nŠ
kŠ .nk/Š
:(C.2)
ForkD0, this formula tells us that the number of ways to choose0elements from
ann-set is1(not0), since0ŠD1.
Binomial coefficients
The notation

n
k

(read “nchoosek”)  denotes  the number  ofk-combinations  of
ann-set. From equation (C.2), we have
 
n
k
!
D
nŠ
kŠ .nk/Š
:
This formula is symmetric inkandnk:
 
n
k
!
D
 
n
nk
!
:(C.3)

1186Appendix CCounting and Probability
These numbers are also known asbinomial coefficients, due to their appearance in
thebinomial expansion:
.xCy/
n
D
n
X
kD0
 
n
k
!
x
k
y
nk
:(C.4)
A special case of the binomial expansion occurs whenxDyD1:
2
n
D
n
X
kD0
 
n
k
!
:
This formula corresponds to counting the2
n
binaryn-strings by the number of1s
they contain:

n
k

binaryn-strings contain exactlyk1s, since we have

n
k

ways to
choosekout of thenpositions in which to place the1s.
Many identities involve binomial coefficients.  The exercises at the end of this
section give you the opportunity to prove a few.
Binomial bounds
We sometimes need to bound the size of a binomial coefficient.  For1kn,
we have the lower bound
 
n
k
!
D
n.n1/.nkC1/
k.k1/1
D

n
k


n1
k1



nkC1
1



n
k

k
:
Taking advantage of the inequalitykŠ.k=e/
k
derived from Stirling’s approxi-
mation (3.18), we obtain the upper bounds
 
n
k
!
D
n.n1/.nkC1/
k.k1/1

n
k
kŠ


en
k

k
:(C.5)
For all integersksuch that0kn, we can use induction (see Exercise C.1-12)
to prove the bound

C.1    Counting1187
 
n
k
!

n
n
k
k
.nk/
nk
;(C.6)
where for convenience we assume that0
0
D1.ForkDn,where01,we
can rewrite this bound as
 
n
n
!

n
n
.n/
	n
..1/n/
.1	/n
D
 

1


	

1
1

1	
!
n
D2
nH.	/
;
where
H./Dlg.1/lg.1/(C.7)
is  the(binary) entropy functionand  where,  for  convenience,  we  assume  that
0lg0D0,sothatH.0/DH.1/D0.
Exercises
C.1-1
How manyk-substrings does ann-string have? (Consider identicalk-substrings at
different positions to be different.)  How many substrings does ann-string have in
total?
C.1-2
Ann-input,m-outputboolean functionis  a  function  from
f
TRUE;FALSE
g
n
to
f
TRUE;FALSE
g
m
.Howmanyn-input,1-output boolean functions are there?  How
manyn-input,m-output boolean functions are there?
C.1-3
In how many ways cannprofessors sit around a circular conference table?  Con-
sider two seatings to be the same if one can be rotated to form the other.
C.1-4
In how many ways can we choose three distinct numbers from the set
f
1;2;:::;99
g
so that their sum is even?

1188Appendix CCounting and Probability
C.1-5
Prove the identity
 
n
k
!
D
n
k
 
n1
k1
!
(C.8)
for0<kn.
C.1-6
Prove the identity
 
n
k
!
D
n
nk
 
n1
k
!
for0k<n.
C.1-7
To choosekobjects fromn, you can make one of the objects distinguished  and
consider  whether the distinguished  object is chosen.  Use this approach to prove
that
 
n
k
!
D
 
n1
k
!
C
 
n1
k1
!
:
C.1-8
Using the result of Exercise C.1-7, make a table fornD0; 1; : : : ; 6and0kn
of the binomial coefficients

n
k

with

0
0

at the top,

1
0

and

1
1

on the next line, and
so forth. Such a table of binomial coefficients is calledPascal’s triangle.
C.1-9
Prove that
n
X
iD1
iD
 
nC1
2
!
:
C.1-10
Show that for any integersn0and0kn, the expression

n
k

achieves its
maximum value whenkD
b
n=2
c
orkD
d
n=2
e
.
C.1-11?
Argue that for any integersn0,j0,k0,andjCkn,
 
n
jCk
!

 
n
j
! 
nj
k
!
:(C.9)

C.2    Probability1189
Provide both an algebraic proof and an argument based on a method for choosing
jCkitems out ofn. Give an example in which equality does not hold.
C.1-12?
Use induction on all integersksuch that0kn=2to prove inequality (C.6),
and use equation (C.3) to extend it to all integersksuch that0kn.
C.1-13?
Use Stirling’s approximation to prove that
 
2n
n
!
D
2
2n
p
n
.1CO.1=n// :(C.10)
C.1-14?
By differentiating the entropy functionH./, show that it achieves its maximum
value atD1=2.WhatisH.1=2/?
C.1-15?
Show that for any integern0,
n
X
kD0
 
n
k
!
kDn2
n1
:(C.11)
C.2  Probability
Probability is an essential tool for the design and analysis of probabilistic and ran-
domized algorithms. This section reviews basic probability theory.
We define probability in terms of asample spaceS, which is a set whose ele-
ments are calledelementary events.  We can think of each elementary event as a
possible outcome of an experiment. For the experiment of flipping two distinguish-
able coins, with each individual flip resulting in a head (
H)oratail(T), we can view
the sample space as consisting of the set of all possible2-strings over
f
H;T
g
:
SD
f
HH;HT;TH;TT
g
:

1190Appendix CCounting and Probability
Aneventisasubset
1
of the sample spaceS. For example, in the experiment of
flipping two coins, the event of obtaining one head and one tail is
f
HT;TH
g
.The
eventSis called thecertain event, and the event;is called thenull event. We say
that two eventsAandBaremutually exclusiveifA\BD;. We sometimes treat
an elementary events2Sas the event
f
s
g
.  By definition, all elementary events
are mutually exclusive.
Axioms of probability
Aprobability distributionPr
fg
on a sample spaceSis a mapping from events ofS
to real numbers satisfying the followingprobability axioms:
1.   Pr
f
A
g
0for any eventA.
2.   Pr
f
S
g
D1.
3.   Pr
f
A[B
g
DPr
f
A
g
CPr
f
B
g
for  any  two  mutually  exclusive  eventsA
andB. More generally, for any (finite or countably infinite) sequence of events
A
1
;A
2
;:::that are pairwise mutually exclusive,
Pr
(
[
i
A
i
)
D
X
i
Pr
f
A
i
g
:
We  call  Pr
f
A
g
theprobabilityof  the  eventA.   We note  here  that  axiom  2  is  a
normalization requirement:  there is really nothing fundamental about choosing1
as the probability of the certain event, except that it is natural and convenient.
Several results follow immediately from these axioms and basic set theory (see
Section  B.1).   The  null  event;has  probability  Pr
f
;
g
D0.IfAB,then
Pr
f
A
g
Pr
f
B
g
.Using
Ato denote  the eventSA(thecomplementofA),
we have Pr
 ̊
A


D1Pr
f
A
g
. For any two eventsAandB,
Pr
f
A[B
g
DPr
f
A
g
CPr
f
B
g
Pr
f
A\B
g
(C.12)
Pr
f
A
g
CPr
f
B
g
:(C.13)
1
For a general probability distribution, there may be some subsets of the sample spaceSthat are not
considered to be events. This situation usually arises when the sample space is uncountably infinite.
The main requirement for what subsets are events is that the set of events of a sample space be closed
under the operations of taking the complement of an event, forming the union of a finite or countable
number  of events,  and taking the intersection of a finite or countable  number  of events.   Most of
the probability distributions we shall see are over finite or countable sample spaces,  and we shall
generally consider all subsets of a sample space to be events.  A notable exception is the continuous
uniform probability distribution, which we shall see shortly.

C.2    Probability1191
In our coin-flipping example,  suppose that each of the four elementary events
has probability1=4. Then the probability of getting at least one head is
Pr
f
HH;HT;TH
g
DPr
f
HH
g
CPr
f
HT
g
CPr
f
TH
g
D3=4 :
Alternatively,   since  the  probability  of  getting  strictly  less  than  one  head  is
Pr
f
TT
g
D1=4, the probability of getting at least one head is11=4D3=4.
Discrete probability distributions
A probability distribution isdiscreteif it is defined over a finite or countably infinite
sample space. LetSbe the sample space. Then for any eventA,
Pr
f
A
g
D
X
s2A
Pr
f
s
g
;
since elementary events,  specifically those inA, are mutually exclusive.  IfSis
finite and every elementary events2Shas probability
Pr
f
s
g
D1=
j
S
j
;
then we have theuniform probability distributiononS. In such a case the experi-
ment is often described as “picking an element ofSat random.”
As an example, consider the process of flipping afair coin, one for which the
probability of obtaining a head is the same as the probability of obtaining a tail, that
is,1=2.  If we flip the coinntimes, we have the uniform probability distribution
defined on the sample spaceSD
f
H;T
g
n
, a set of size2
n
.  We can represent each
elementary event inSas a string of lengthnover
f
H;T
g
, each string occurring with
probability1=2
n
.Theevent
AD
f
exactlykheads and exactlynktails occur
g
is a subset ofSof size
j
A
j
D

n
k

,since

n
k

strings of lengthnover
f
H;T
g
contain
exactlyk
H’s. The probability of eventAis thus Pr
f
A
g
D

n
k

=2
n
.
Continuous uniform probability distribution
The  continuous  uniform  probability  distribution  is  an  example  of  a  probability
distribution  in  which  not  all  subsets  of  the  sample  space  are  considered  to  be
events.  The continuous  uniform probability  distribution  is defined over a closed
intervalŒa; bof the reals, wherea<b.  Our intuition is that each point in the in-
tervalŒa; bshould be “equally likely.” There are an uncountable number of points,
however, so if we give all points the same finite, positive probability, we cannot si-
multaneously satisfy axioms 2 and 3. For this reason, we would like to associate a

1192Appendix CCounting and Probability
probability only withsomeof the subsets ofS, in such a way that the axioms are
satisfied for these events.
For any closed intervalŒc; d ,whereacdb,thecontinuous uniform
probability distributiondefines the probability of the eventŒc; d to be
Pr
f
Œc; d 
g
D
dc
ba
:
Note  that  for  any  pointxDŒx; x,  the  probability  ofxis0.   If  we  remove
the  endpoints  of  an  intervalŒc; d ,  we  obtain  the  open  interval.c; d /.Since
Œc; d DŒc; c[.c; d /[Œd; d , axiom 3 gives us Pr
f
Œc; d 
g
DPr
f
.c; d /
g
.Gen-
erally, the set of events for the continuous uniform probability distribution contains
any subset of the sample spaceŒa; bthat can be obtained by a finite or countable
union of open and closed intervals, as well as certain more complicated sets.
Conditional probability and independence
Sometimes we have some prior partial knowledge about the outcome of an exper-
iment.  For example, suppose that a friend has flipped two fair coins and has told
you that at least one of the coins showed a head.  What is the probability that both
coins are heads? The information given eliminates the possibility of two tails. The
three remaining elementary events are equally likely, so we infer that each occurs
with probability1=3. Since only one of these elementary events shows two heads,
the answer to our question is1=3.
Conditional probability formalizes the notion of having prior partial knowledge
of the outcome of an experiment. Theconditional probabilityof an eventAgiven
that another eventBoccurs is defined to be
Pr
f
AjB
g
D
Pr
f
A\B
g
Pr
f
B
g
(C.14)
whenever Pr
f
B
g
¤0.  (We read “Pr
f
AjB
g
” as “the probability ofAgivenB.”)
Intuitively,  since we are given that eventBoccurs,  the event thatAalso occurs
isA\B.Thatis,A\Bis the set of outcomes in which bothAandBoccur.
Because the outcome is one of the elementary events inB, we normalize the prob-
abilities of all the elementary events inBby dividing them by Pr
f
B
g
, so that they
sum to1.  The conditional probability ofAgivenBis, therefore, the ratio of the
probability of eventA\Bto the probability of eventB. In the example above,A
is the event that both coins are heads, andBis the event that at least one coin is a
head. Thus, Pr
f
AjB
g
D.1=4/=.3=4/D1=3.
Two events areindependentif
Pr
f
A\B
g
DPr
f
A
g
Pr
f
B
g
;(C.15)
which is equivalent, if Pr
f
B
g
¤0, to the condition

C.2    Probability1193
Pr
f
AjB
g
DPr
f
A
g
:
For example, suppose that we flip two fair coins and that the outcomes are inde-
pendent.  Then the probability of two heads is.1=2/.1=2/D1=4.  Now suppose
that one event is that the first coin comes up heads and the other event is that the
coins come up differently.  Each of these events occurs with probability1=2,and
the probability that both events occur is1=4;  thus, according to the definition of
independence, the events are independent—even though you might think that both
events  depend  on  the  first  coin.   Finally,  suppose  that  the  coins  are  welded  to-
gether so that they both fall heads or both fall tails and that the two possibilities are
equally likely.  Then the probability that each coin comes up heads is1=2,butthe
probability that they both come up heads is1=2¤.1=2/.1=2/.  Consequently, the
event that one comes up heads and the event that the other comes up heads are not
independent.
A collectionA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
of events is said to bepairwise independentif
Pr
f
A
i
\A
j
g
DPr
f
A
i
g
Pr
f
A
j
g
for all1i<jn.  We say that the events of the collection are(mutually)
independentif everyk-subsetA
i
1
;A
i
2
;:::;A
i
k
of the collection, where2kn
and1i
1
<i
2
<<i
k
n, satisfies
Pr
f
A
i
1
\A
i
2
\\A
i
k
g
DPr
f
A
i
1
g
Pr
f
A
i
2
g
Pr
f
A
i
k
g
:
For example, suppose we flip two fair coins. LetA
1
be the event that the first coin
is heads, letA
2
be the event that the second coin is heads, and letA
3
be the event
that the two coins are different. We have
Pr
f
A
1
g
D1=2 ;
Pr
f
A
2
g
D1=2 ;
Pr
f
A
3
g
D1=2 ;
Pr
f
A
1
\A
2
g
D1=4 ;
Pr
f
A
1
\A
3
g
D1=4 ;
Pr
f
A
2
\A
3
g
D1=4 ;
Pr
f
A
1
\A
2
\A
3
g
D0:
Since for1i<j3,wehavePr
f
A
i
\A
j
g
DPr
f
A
i
g
Pr
f
A
j
g
D1=4,the
eventsA
1
,A
2
,andA
3
are pairwise independent. The events are not mutually inde-
pendent, however, because Pr
f
A
1
\A
2
\A
3
g
D0and Pr
f
A
1
g
Pr
f
A
2
g
Pr
f
A
3
g
D
1=8¤0.

1194Appendix CCounting and Probability
Bayes’s theorem
From  the  definition  of  conditional  probability  (C.14)  and  the  commutative  law
A\BDB\A,  it  follows  that  for  two  eventsAandB,  each  with  nonzero
probability,
Pr
f
A\B
g
DPr
f
B
g
Pr
f
AjB
g
(C.16)
DPr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
:
Solving for Pr
f
AjB
g
, we obtain
Pr
f
AjB
g
D
Pr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
Pr
f
B
g
;(C.17)
which  is known  asBayes’s theorem.   The denominator  Pr
f
B
g
is a normalizing
constant, which we can reformulate as follows.  SinceBD.B\A/[.B\
A/,
and sinceB\AandB\
Aare mutually exclusive events,
Pr
f
B
g
DPr
f
B\A
g
CPr
 ̊
B\
A


DPr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
CPr
 ̊
A


Pr
 ̊
BjA


:
Substituting into equation (C.17), we obtain an equivalent form of Bayes’s theo-
rem:
Pr
f
AjB
g
D
Pr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
Pr
f
A
g
Pr
f
BjA
g
CPr
 ̊
A


Pr
 ̊
BjA

:(C.18)
Bayes’s theorem can simplify the computing of conditional  probabilities.   For
example, suppose that we have a fair coin and a biased coin that always comes up
heads.  We run an experiment consisting of three independent events:  we choose
one of the two coins at random, we flip that coin once, and then we flip it again.
Suppose that the coin we have chosen comes up heads both times.   What is the
probability that it is biased?
We solve this problem using Bayes’s theorem. LetAbe the event that we choose
the biased coin, and letBbe the event that the chosen coin comes up heads both
times.  We wish to determine Pr
f
AjB
g
.WehavePr
f
A
g
D1=2,Pr
f
BjA
g
D1,
Pr
 ̊
A


D1=2,andPr
 ̊
BjA


D1=4; hence,
Pr
f
AjB
g
D
.1=2/1
.1=2/1C.1=2/.1=4/
D4=5 :
Exercises
C.2-1
Professor  Guildenstern  flips a fair
?
coin twice. What is the probability that Professor Rosencrantz obtains more heads
Professor  Rosencrantz  flips a fair  coin once.
than Professor Guildenstern

C.2    Probability1195
C.2-2
ProveBoole’s inequality:  For any finite or countably infinite sequence of events
A
1
;A
2
;:::,
Pr
f
A
1
[A
2
[
g
Pr
f
A
1
g
CPr
f
A
2
g
C:(C.19)
C.2-3
Suppose we shuffle a deck of 10 cards, each bearing a distinct number from 1 to 10,
to mix the cards thoroughly.  We then remove three cards, one at a time, from the
deck.  What is the probability that we select the three cards in sorted (increasing)
order?
C.2-4
Prove that
Pr
f
AjB
g
CPr
 ̊
AjB


D1:
C.2-5
Prove that for any collection of eventsA
1
;A
2
;:::;A
n
,
Pr
f
A
1
\A
2
\\A
n
g
DPr
f
A
1
g
Pr
f
A
2
jA
1
g
Pr
f
A
3
jA
1
\A
2
g

Pr
f
A
n
jA
1
\A
2
\\A
n1
g
:
C.2-6?
Describe a procedure that takes as input two integersaandbsuch that0<a<b
and, using fair coin flips, produces as output heads with probabilitya=band tails
with probability.ba/=b.  Give a bound on the expected number of coin flips,
which should beO.1/.(Hint:Representa=bin binary.)
C.2-7?
Show how to construct a set ofnevents that are pairwise independent but such that
no subset ofk>2of them is mutually independent.
C.2-8?
Two eventsAandBareconditionally independent,givenC,if
Pr
f
A\BjC
g
DPr
f
AjC
g
Pr
f
BjC
g
:
Give a simple but nontrivial example of two events that are not independent but are
conditionally independent given a third event.
C.2-9?
You are  a contestant  in  a  game show  in  which  a prize  is  hidden  behind  one  of
three curtains.  You will win the prize if you select the correct curtain.  After you

1196Appendix CCounting and Probability
have picked one curtain but before the curtain is lifted, the emcee lifts one of the
other curtains, knowing that it will reveal an empty stage, and asks if you would
like to switch from your current selection to the remaining curtain.  How would
your chances change if you switch?  (This question is the celebratedMonty Hall
problem, named after a game-show host who often presented contestants with just
this dilemma.)
C.2-10?
A prison warden has randomly picked one prisoner among three to go free.  The
other two will be executed. The guard knows which one will go free but is forbid-
den to give any prisoner information regarding his status. Let us call the prisoners
X,Y,andZ.  PrisonerXasks the guard privately which ofYorZwill be exe-
cuted, arguing that since he already knows that at least one of them must die, the
guard won’t be revealing any information about his own status.  The guard tellsX
thatYis to be executed.  PrisonerXfeels happier now, since he figures that either
he or prisonerZwill go free,  which means that his probability  of going free is
now1=2. Is he right, or are his chances still1=3? Explain.
C.3  Discrete random variables
A(discrete) random variableXis a function from a finite or countably infinite
sample spaceSto the real numbers. It associates a real number with each possible
outcome of an experiment, which allows us to work with the probability distribu-
tion induced on the resulting set of numbers. Random variables can also be defined
for uncountably infinite sample spaces, but they raise technical issues that are un-
necessary to address for our purposes.  Henceforth, we shall assume that random
variables are discrete.
For a random variableXand a real numberx, we define the eventXDxto be
f
s2SWX.s/Dx
g
; thus,
Pr
f
XDx
g
D
X
s2SWX.s/Dx
Pr
f
s
g
:
The function
f.x/DPr
f
XDx
g
is theprobability density functionof the random variableX. From the probability
axioms, Pr
f
XDx
g
0and
P
x
Pr
f
XDx
g
D1.
As an example,  consider  the experiment  of rolling a pair of ordinary,  6-sided
dice.  There are36possible elementary events in the sample space.  We assume

C.3    Discrete random variables1197
that the probability distribution is uniform, so that each elementary events2Sis
equally likely: Pr
f
s
g
D1=36. Define the random variableXto be themaximumof
the two values showing on the dice. We have Pr
f
XD3
g
D5=36,sinceXassigns
a value of3to 5 of the 36 possible elementary events, namely,.1; 3/,.2; 3/,.3; 3/,
.3; 2/,and.3; 1/.
We often define several random variables on the same sample space. IfXandY
are random variables, the function
f.x;y/DPr
f
XDxandYDy
g
is thejoint probability density functionofXandY. For a fixed valuey,
Pr
f
YDy
g
D
X
x
Pr
f
XDxandYDy
g
;
and similarly, for a fixed valuex,
Pr
f
XDx
g
D
X
y
Pr
f
XDxandYDy
g
:
Using the definition (C.14) of conditional probability, we have
Pr
f
XDxjYDy
g
D
Pr
f
XDxandYDy
g
Pr
f
YDy
g
:
We define two random variablesXandYto beindependentif for allxandy,the
eventsXDxandYDyare independent or, equivalently, if for allxandy,we
have Pr
f
XDxandYDy
g
DPr
f
XDx
g
Pr
f
YDy
g
.
Given a set of random  variables  defined over the same sample space,  we can
define new random variables as sums, products, or other functions of the original
variables.
Expected value of a random variable
The simplest and most useful summary of the distribution of a random variable is
the “average”  of the values it takes on.   Theexpected value(or,  synonymously,
expectationormean) of a discrete random variableXis
EŒX D
X
x
xPr
f
XDx
g
;(C.20)
which is well defined if the sum is finite or converges absolutely.  Sometimes the
expectation ofXis denoted by
X
or, when the random variable is apparent from
context, simply by.
Consider a game in which you flip two fair coins. You earn $3for each head but
lose $2for each tail.  The expected value of the random variableXrepresenting

1198Appendix CCounting and Probability
your earnings is
EŒX D6Pr
f
2
H’s
g
C1Pr
f
1H,1T
g
4Pr
f
2
T’s
g
D6.1=4/C1.1=2/4.1=4/
D1:
The expectation of the sum of two random variables is the sum of their expecta-
tions, that is,
EŒXCYDEŒX CEŒY   ;(C.21)
whenever EŒX and EŒY are defined.  We call this propertylinearity of expecta-
tion, and it holds even ifXandYare not independent. It also extends to finite and
absolutely convergent summations of expectations.  Linearity of expectation is the
key property that enables us to perform probabilistic analyses by using indicator
random variables (see Section 5.2).
IfXis  any  random  variable,  any  functiong.x/defines  a  new  random  vari-
ableg.X/. If the expectation ofg.X/is defined, then
EŒg.X /D
X
x
g.x/Pr
f
XDx
g
:
Lettingg.x/Dax, we have for any constanta,
EŒaX DaEŒX  :(C.22)
Consequently, expectations are linear: for any two random variablesXandYand
any constanta,
EŒaXCYDaEŒX CEŒY   :(C.23)
When two random variablesXandYare independent and each has a defined
expectation,
EŒX Y D
X
x
X
y
xyPr
f
XDxandYDy
g
D
X
x
X
y
xyPr
f
XDx
g
Pr
f
YDy
g
D
 
X
x
xPr
f
XDx
g
! 
X
y
yPr
f
YDy
g
!
DEŒX EŒY  :
In general, whennrandom variablesX
1
;X
2
;:::;X
n
are mutually independent,
EŒX
1
X
2
X
n
DEŒX
1
EŒX
2
EŒX
n
:(C.24)

C.3    Discrete random variables1199
When  a  random  variableXtakes  on  values  from  the  set  of  natural  numbers
ND
f
0; 1; 2; : : :
g
, we have a nice formula for its expectation:
EŒX D
1
X
iD0
iPr
f
XDi
g
D
1
X
iD0
i.Pr
f
Xi
g
Pr
f
XiC1
g
/
D
1
X
iD1
Pr
f
Xi
g
;(C.25)
since  each  term  Pr
f
Xi
g
is  added  initimes  and  subtracted  outi1times
(except Pr
f
X0
g
, which is added in0times and not subtracted out at all).
When we apply a convex functionf.x/to a random variableX,Jensen’s in-
equalitygives us
EŒf .X /f.EŒX / ;(C.26)
provided  that  the  expectations  exist  and  are  finite.   (A  functionf.x/isconvex
if  for  allxandyand  for  all01,wehavef.xC.1/y/
f . x /C.1/f .y/.)
Variance and standard deviation
The expected  value  of  a random  variable  does  not  tell  us how “spread  out”  the
variable’s values are. For example, if we have random variablesXandYfor which
Pr
f
XD1=4
g
DPr
f
XD3=4
g
D1=2and Pr
f
YD0
g
D
Pr
f
YD1
g
D1=2,
then both EŒX and EŒY are1=2, yet the actual values taken on byYare farther
from the mean than the actual values taken on byX.
The notion of variance mathematically expresses how far from the mean a ran-
dom variable’s values are likely to be.  Thevarianceof a random variableXwith
mean EŒX is
Va rŒX DE

.XEŒX /
2

DE

X
2
2XEŒX CE
2
ŒX 

DE

X
2

2EŒXEŒX CE
2
ŒX 
DE

X
2

2E
2
ŒX CE
2
ŒX 
DE

X
2

E
2
ŒX  :(C.27)
To justify the equality EŒE
2
ŒX DE
2
ŒX , note that because EŒX isarealnum-
ber  and not  a random  variable,  so is E
2
ŒX .   The equality  EŒXEŒX DE
2
ŒX 

1200Appendix CCounting and Probability
follows from equation (C.22), withaDEŒX .  Rewriting equation (C.27) yields
an expression for the expectation of the square of a random variable:
E

X
2

DVa rŒX CE
2
ŒX   :(C.28)
The variance of a random variableXand the variance ofaXare related (see
Exercise C.3-10):
Va rŒaX Da
2
Va rŒX  :
WhenXandYare independent random variables,
Va rŒXCYDVa rŒX CVa rŒY  :
In general, ifnrandom variablesX
1
;X
2
;:::;X
n
are pairwise independent, then
Va r
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
D
n
X
iD1
Va rŒX
i
:(C.29)
Thestandard deviationof a random variableXis the nonnegative square root
of the variance ofX. The standard deviation of a random variableXis sometimes
denoted	
X
or simply	when the random variableXis understood from context.
With this notation, the variance ofXis denoted	
2
.
Exercises
C.3-1
Suppose we roll two ordinary,  6-sided dice.  What is the expectation of the sum
of the two values showing?  What is the expectation of the maximum of the two
values showing?
C.3-2
An arrayAŒ1 : : ncontainsndistinct numbers that are randomly ordered, with each
permutation of thennumbers being equally likely.  What is the expectation of the
index of the maximum element in the array?  What is the expectation of the index
of the minimum element in the array?
C.3-3
A carnival game consists of three dice in a cage.  A player can bet a dollar on any
of the numbers1through6. The cage is shaken, and the payoff is as follows. If the
player’s number doesn’t appear on any of the dice, he loses his dollar.  Otherwise,
if his number appears on exactlykof the three dice, forkD1; 2; 3, he keeps his
dollar and winskmore dollars. What is his expected gain from playing the carnival
game once?

C.4    The geometric and binomial distributions1201
C.3-4
Argue that ifXandYare nonnegative random variables, then
EŒmax.X; Y /EŒX CEŒY  :
C.3-5?
LetXandYbe independent  random  variables.   Prove thatf.X/andg.Y /are
independent for any choice of functionsfandg.
C.3-6?
LetXbe a nonnegative random variable, and suppose that EŒX is well defined.
ProveMarkov’s inequality:
Pr
f
Xt
g
EŒX  =t(C.30)
for allt>0.
C.3-7?
LetSbe  a  sample  space,  and  letXandX
0
be  random  variables  such  that
X.s/X
0
.s/for alls2S. Prove that for any real constantt,
Pr
f
Xt
g
Pr
f
X
0
t
g
:
C.3-8
Which is larger:  the expectation of the square of a random variable, or the square
of its expectation?
C.3-9
Show that for any random variableXthat takes on only the values0and1,wehave
Va rŒX DEŒX EŒ1X.
C.3-10
Prove that VarŒaX Da
2
Va rŒX from the definition (C.27) of variance.
C.4  The geometric and binomial distributions
We can think of a coin flip as an instance of aBernoulli trial, which is an experi-
ment with only two possible outcomes:success, which occurs with probabilityp,
andfailure, which occurs with probabilityqD1p. When we speak ofBernoulli
trialscollectively, we mean that the trials are mutually independent and, unless we
specifically say otherwise, that each has the same probabilitypfor success.  Two

1202Appendix CCounting and Probability
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
123456789101112131415
0.30
0.35
k

2
3

k1

1
3

Figure C.1A  geometric  distribution  with  probabilitypD1=3of  success  and  a  probability
qD1pof failure. The expectation of the distribution is1=pD3.
important distributions arise from Bernoulli trials:  the geometric distribution and
the binomial distribution.
The geometric distribution
Suppose we have a sequence of Bernoulli trials, each with a probabilitypof suc-
cess and a probabilityqD1pof failure. How many trials occur before we obtain
a success?  Let us define the random variableXbe the number of trials needed to
obtain a success. ThenXhas values in the range
f
1;2;:::
g
,andfork1,
Pr
f
XDk
g
Dq
k1
p;(C.31)
since we havek1failures before the one success. A probability distribution sat-
isfying equation (C.31) is said to be ageometric distribution. Figure C.1 illustrates
such a distribution.

C.4    The geometric and binomial distributions1203
Assuming thatq<1, we can calculate the expectation of a geometric distribu-
tion using identity (A.8):
EŒX D
1
X
kD1
kq
k1
p
D
p
q
1
X
kD0
kq
k
D
p
q

q
.1q/
2
D
p
q

q
p
2
D1=p :(C.32)
Thus, on average, it takes1=ptrials before we obtain a success, an intuitive result.
The variance, which can be calculated similarly, but using Exercise A.1-3, is
Va rŒX Dq=p
2
:(C.33)
As an example,  suppose  we repeatedly  roll  two dice  until  we obtain  either  a
seven or an eleven.  Of the 36 possible outcomes, 6 yield a seven and 2 yield an
eleven.  Thus, the probability of success ispD8=36D2=9, and we must roll
1=pD9=2D4:5times on average to obtain a seven or eleven.
The binomial distribution
How many successes occur duringnBernoulli trials, where a success occurs with
probabilitypand a failure with probabilityqD1p?  Define the random vari-
ableXto be the number of successes inntrials.  ThenXhas values in the range
f
0; 1; : : : ; n
g
,andforkD0; 1; : : : ; n,
Pr
f
XDk
g
D
 
n
k
!
p
k
q
nk
;(C.34)
since  there  are

n
k

ways  to  pick  whichkof  thentrials  are  successes,  and  the
probability that each occurs isp
k
q
nk
. A probability distribution satisfying equa-
tion (C.34) is said to be abinomial distribution.  For convenience,  we define the
family of binomial distributions using the notation
b.kIn; p/D
 
n
k
!
p
k
.1p/
nk
:(C.35)
Figure C.2 illustrates a binomial distribution. The name “binomial” comes from the
right-hand side of equation (C.34) being thekth term of the expansion of.pCq/
n
.
Consequently, sincepCqD1,

1204Appendix CCounting and Probability
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
k
0123456789101112131415
b(k; 15, 1/3)
Figure C.2The binomial distributionb.kI15; 1=3/resulting fromnD15Bernoulli trials, each
with probabilitypD1=3of success. The expectation of the distribution isnpD5.
n
X
kD0
b.kIn; p/D1;(C.36)
as axiom 2 of the probability axioms requires.
We can compute the expectation of a random variable having a binomial distri-
bution from equations (C.8) and (C.36).  LetXbe a random variable that follows
the binomial distributionb.kIn; p/,andletqD1p. By the definition of expec-
tation, we have
EŒX D
n
X
kD0
kPr
f
XDk
g
D
n
X
kD0
kb.kIn; p/
D
n
X
kD1
k
 
n
k
!
p
k
q
nk
Dnp
n
X
kD1
 
n1
k1
!
p
k1
q
nk
(by equation (C.8))
Dnp
n1
X
kD0
 
n1
k
!
p
k
q
.n1/k

C.4    The geometric and binomial distributions1205
Dnp
n1
X
kD0
b.kIn1; p/
Dnp(by equation (C.36))  .(C.37)
By using the linearity of expectation,  we can obtain the same result with sub-
stantially  less algebra.   LetX
i
be the random  variable describing  the number of
successes in theith trial.  Then EŒX
i
Dp1Cq0Dp, and by linearity of
expectation (equation (C.21)), the expected number of successes forntrials is
EŒX DE
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
D
n
X
iD1
EŒX
i

D
n
X
iD1
p
Dnp :(C.38)
We can use the same approach to calculate the variance of the distribution. Using
equation (C.27), we have VarŒX
i
DEŒX
2
i
E
2
ŒX
i
.SinceX
i
only takes on the
values0and1,wehaveX
2
i
DX
i
, which implies EŒX
2
i
DEŒX
i
Dp. Hence,
Va rŒX
i
Dpp
2
Dp.1p/Dpq :(C.39)
To compute the variance ofX, we take advantage of the independence of then
trials; thus, by equation (C.29),
Va rŒX DVa r
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
D
n
X
iD1
Va rŒX
i

D
n
X
iD1
pq
Dnp q :(C.40)
As Figure C.2 shows, the binomial distributionb.kIn; p/increases withkuntil
it reaches the meannp, and then it decreases.  We can prove that the distribution
always behaves in this manner by looking at the ratio of successive terms:

1206Appendix CCounting and Probability
b.kIn; p/
b.k1In; p/
D

n
k

p
k
q
nk

n
k1

p
k1
q
nkC1
D
nŠ.k1/Š.nkC1/Šp
kŠ.nk/ŠnŠq
D
.nkC1/p
kq
(C.41)
D1C
.nC1/pk
kq
:
This  ratio  is  greater  than1precisely  when.nC1/pkis  positive.   Conse-
quently,b.kIn; p/ > b.k1In; p/fork<.nC1/p(the distribution increases),
andb.kIn; p/  <  b.k1In; p/fork>.nC1/p(the distribution  decreases).
IfkD.nC1/pis an integer, thenb.kIn; p/Db.k1In; p/, and so the distri-
bution then has two maxima: atkD.nC1/pand atk1D.nC1/p1Dnpq.
Otherwise,  it  attains  a  maximum  at  the  unique  integerkthat  lies  in  the  range
npq<k<.nC1/p.
The following lemma provides an upper bound on the binomial distribution.
Lemma C.1
Letn0,let0<p<1,letqD1p,andlet0
kn.Then
b.kIn; p/

np
k

k

nq
nk

nk
:
ProofUsing equation (C.6), we have
b.kIn; p/D
 
n
k
!
p
k
q
nk


n
k

k

n
nk

nk
p
k
q
nk
D

np
k

k

nq
nk

nk
:
Exercises
C.4-1
Verify axiom 2 of the probability axioms for the geometric distribution.
C.4-2
How many times on average must we flip 6 fair coins before we obtain 3 heads
and 3 tails?

C.4    The geometric and binomial distributions1207
C.4-3
Show thatb.kIn; p/Db.nkIn; q/,whereqD1p.
C.4-4
Show that value of the maximum of the binomial distributionb.kIn; p/is approx-
imately1=
p
2 npq,whereqD1p.
C.4-5?
Show that the probability of no successes innBernoulli trials, each with probability
pD1=n, is approximately1=e.  Show that the probability of exactly one success
is also approximately1=e.
C.4-6?
Professor Rosencrantz flips a fair coinntimes, and so does Professor Guildenstern.
Show that the probability that they get the same number of heads is

2n
n

=4
n
.(Hint:
For Professor Rosencrantz, call a head a success; for Professor Guildenstern, call
a tail a success.) Use your argument to verify the identity
n
X
kD0
 
n
k
!
2
D
 
2n
n
!
:
C.4-7?
Show that for0kn,
b.kIn; 1=2/2
nH.k=n/n
;
whereH.x/is the entropy function (C.7).
C.4-8?
ConsidernBernoulli trials, where foriD1;2;:::;n,theith trial has probabil-
ityp
i
of success, and letXbe the random variable denoting the total number of
successes. Letpp
i
for alliD1;2;:::;n. Prove that for1kn,
Pr
f
X<k
g

k1
X
iD0
b.iIn; p/ :
C.4-9?
LetXbe the random  variable for the total number  of successes  in a setAofn
Bernoulli  trials,  where  theith  trial  has  a  probabilityp
i
of  success,  and  letX
0
be the random variable for the total number of successes in a second setA
0
ofn
Bernoulli trials, where theith trial has a probabilityp
0
i
p
i
of success. Prove that
for0kn,

1208Appendix CCounting and Probability
Pr
f
X
0
k
g
Pr
f
Xk
g
:
(Hint:Show how to obtain the Bernoulli trials inA
0
by an experiment involving
the trials ofA, and use the result of Exercise C.3-7.)
?C.5  The tails of the binomial distribution
The probability  of having  at least,  or at most,ksuccesses  innBernoulli  trials,
each with probabilitypof success, is often of more interest than the probability of
having exactlyksuccesses. In this section, we investigate thetailsof the binomial
distribution:  the  two  regions  of  the  distributionb.kIn; p/that  are  far  from  the
meannp.  We shall prove several important bounds on (the sum of all terms in) a
tail.
We first provide a bound on the right tail of the distributionb.kIn; p/.  We can
determine bounds on the left tail by inverting the roles of successes and failures.
Theorem C.2
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where success occurs with probabilityp.
LetXbe the random variable denoting the total number of successes.  Then for
0kn, the probability of at leastksuccesses is
Pr
f
Xk
g
D
n
X
iDk
b.iIn; p/

 
n
k
!
p
k
:
ProofForS
f
1;2;:::;n
g
,weletA
S
denote the event that theith trial is a
success for everyi2S. Clearly Pr
f
A
S
g
Dp
k
if
j
S
j
Dk.Wehave
Pr
f
Xk
g
DPr
f
there existsS
f
1;2;:::;n
g
W
j
S
j
DkandA
S
g
DPr

[
Sf1;2;:::;ngWjSjDk
A
S


X
Sf1;2;:::;ngWjSjDk
Pr
f
A
S
g
(by inequality (C.19))
D
 
n
k
!
p
k
:

C.5    The tails of the binomial distribution1209
The  following  corollary  restates  the  theorem  for  the  left  tail  of  the  binomial
distribution. In general, we shall leave it to you to adapt the proofs from one tail to
the other.
Corollary C.3
Consider  a  sequence  ofnBernoulli  trials,  where  success  occurs  with  probabil-
ityp.IfXis the random variable denoting the total number of successes, then for
0kn, the probability of at mostksuccesses is
Pr
f
Xk
g
D
k
X
iD0
b.iIn; p/

 
n
nk
!
.1p/
nk
D
 
n
k
!
.1p/
nk
:
Our next bound concerns the left tail of the binomial distribution.  Its corollary
shows that, far from the mean, the left tail diminishes exponentially.
Theorem C.4
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where success occurs with probabilityp
and failure with probabilityqD1p.LetXbe the random variable denoting the
total number of successes.  Then for0<k<np, the probability of fewer thank
successes is
Pr
f
X<k
g
D
k1
X
iD0
b.iIn; p/
<
kq
npk
b.kIn; p/ :
ProofWe bound the series
P
k1
iD0
b.iIn; p/by a geometric series using the tech-
nique  from  Section  A.2,  page  1151.   ForiD1;2;:::;k,  we have  from  equa-
tion (C.41),
b.i1In; p/
b.iIn; p/
D
iq
.niC1/p
<
iq
.ni/p

kq
.nk/p
:

1210Appendix CCounting and Probability
If we let
xD
kq
.nk/p
<
kq
.nnp / p
D
kq
nqp
D
k
np
<1;
it follows that
b.i1In; p/ < x b.iIn; p/
for0<ik. Iteratively applying this inequalitykitimes, we obtain
b.iIn; p/ < x
ki
b.kIn; p/
for0i<k, and hence
k1
X
iD0
b.iIn; p/   <
k1
X
iD0
x
ki
b.kIn; p/
<b.kIn; p/
1
X
iD0
x
i
D
x
1x
b.kIn; p/
D
kq
npk
b.kIn; p/ :
Corollary C.5
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where success occurs with probabilityp
and failure with probabilityqD1p. Then for0<knp = 2, the probability of
fewer thanksuccesses is less than one half of the probability of fewer thankC1
successes.
ProofBecauseknp = 2,wehave
kq
npk

.np=2/q
np.np=2/

C.5    The tails of the binomial distribution1211
D
.np=2/q
np = 2
1;(C.42)
sinceq1. LettingXbe the random variable denoting the number of successes,
Theorem C.4 and inequality (C.42) imply that the probability of fewer thanksuc-
cesses is
Pr
f
X<k
g
D
k1
X
iD0
b.iIn; p/ < b.kIn; p/ :
Thus we have
Pr
f
X<k
g
Pr
f
X<kC1
g
D
P
k1
iD0
b.iIn; p/
P
k
iD0
b.iIn; p/
D
P
k1
iD0
b.iIn; p/
P
k1
iD0
b.iIn; p/Cb.kIn; p/
<1=2;
since
P
k1
iD0
b.iIn; p/ < b.kIn; p/.
Bounds on the right tail follow similarly. Exercise C.5-2 asks you to prove them.
Corollary C.6
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where success occurs with probabilityp.
LetXbe the random variable denoting the total number of successes.  Then for
np<k<n, the probability of more thanksuccesses is
Pr
f
X>k
g
D
n
X
iDkC1
b.iIn; p/
<
.nk/p
knp
b.kIn; p/ :
Corollary C.7
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where success occurs with probabilityp
and failure  with probabilityqD1p.   Then for.npCn/=2  <  k  <  n,the
probability  of  more  thanksuccesses  is  less  than  one  half  of  the  probability  of
more thank1successes.
The  next  theorem  considersnBernoulli  trials,  each  with  a  probabilityp
i
of
success, foriD1;2;:::;n.  As the subsequent corollary shows, we can use the

1212Appendix CCounting and Probability
theorem to provide a bound on the right tail of the binomial distribution by setting
p
i
Dpfor each trial.
Theorem C.8
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where in theith trial, foriD1;2;:::;n,
success occurs with probabilityp
i
and failure occurs with probabilityq
i
D1p
i
.
LetXbe the random  variable  describing  the total  number  of successes,  and let
DEŒX . Then forr>,
Pr
f
Xr
g


e
r

r
:
ProofSince for any ̨>0, the functione
 ̨x
is strictly increasing inx,
Pr
f
Xr
g
DPr
 ̊
e
 ̨.X
/
e
 ̨r


;(C.43)
where we will determine ̨later. Using Markov’s inequality (C.30), we obtain
Pr
 ̊
e
 ̨.X
/
e
 ̨r


E

e
 ̨.X
/

e
 ̨r
:(C.44)
The bulk of the proof consists of bounding E

e
 ̨.X
/

and substituting a suit-
able value for ̨in inequality  (C.44).  First, we evaluate E

e
 ̨.X
/

.Usingthe
technique  of  indicator  random  variables  (see  Section  5.2),  letX
i
DI
f
theith
Bernoulli  trial  is a success
g
foriD1;2;:::;n;thatis,X
i
is the random  vari-
able that is1if theith Bernoulli trial is a success and0if it is a failure. Thus,
XD
n
X
iD1
X
i
;
and by linearity of expectation,
DEŒX DE
"
n
X
iD1
X
i
#
D
n
X
iD1
EŒX
i
D
n
X
iD1
p
i
;
which implies
XD
n
X
iD1
.X
i
p
i
/:
To evaluate E

e
 ̨.X
/

, we substitute forX, obtaining
E

e
 ̨.X
/

DE

e
 ̨
P
n
iD1
.X
i
p
i
/

DE
"
n
Y
iD1
e
 ̨.X
i
p
i
/
#
D
n
Y
iD1
E

e
 ̨.X
i
p
i
/

;

C.5    The tails of the binomial distribution1213
which  follows  from  (C.24),  since  the  mutual  independence  of  the  random  vari-
ablesX
i
implies the mutual independence of the random variablese
 ̨.X
i
p
i
/
(see
Exercise C.3-5). By the definition of expectation,
E

e
 ̨.X
i
p
i
/

De
 ̨.1p
i
/
p
i
Ce
 ̨.0p
i
/
q
i
Dp
i
e
 ̨q
i
Cq
i
e
 ̨p
i
p
i
e
 ̨
C1(C.45)
exp.p
i
e
 ̨
/;
where exp.x/denotes the exponential function:  exp.x/De
x
.  (Inequality (C.45)
follows from the inequalities ̨>0,q
i
1,e
 ̨q
i
e
 ̨
,ande
 ̨p
i
1, and the last
line follows from inequality (3.12).) Consequently,
E

e
 ̨.X
/

D
n
Y
iD1
E

e
 ̨.X
i
p
i
/


n
Y
iD1
exp.p
i
e
 ̨
/
Dexp
 
n
X
iD1
p
i
e
 ̨
!
Dexp.e
 ̨
/;(C.46)
sinceD
P
n
iD1
p
i
.   Therefore,  from  equation  (C.43)  and  inequalities  (C.44)
and (C.46), it follows that
Pr
f
Xr
g
exp.e
 ̨
 ̨r/ :(C.47)
Choosing ̨Dln.r=/(see Exercise C.5-7), we obtain
Pr
f
Xr
g
exp.e
ln.r=
/
rln.r=//
Dexp.rrln.r=//
D
e
r
.r=/
r
D

e
r

r
:
When applied to Bernoulli trials in which each trial has the same probability of
success,  Theorem C.8 yields the following corollary bounding the right tail of a
binomial distribution.

1214Appendix CCounting and Probability
Corollary C.9
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where in each trial success occurs with
probabilitypand failure occurs with probabilityqD1p. Then forr>np,
Pr
f
Xnpr
g
D
n
X
kDdnpCre
b.kIn; p/


np e
r

r
:
ProofBy equation (C.37), we haveDEŒX Dnp.
Exercises
C.5-1?
Which  is  less  likely:  obtaining  no  heads  when  you  flip  a  fair  coinntimes,  or
obtaining fewer thannheads when you flip the coin4ntimes?
C.5-2?
Prove Corollaries C.6 and C.7.
C.5-3?
Show that
k1
X
iD0
 
n
i
!
a
i
<.aC1/
n
k
nak.aC1/
b.kIn; a=.aC1//
for alla>0and allksuch that0<k<na=.aC1/.
C.5-4?
Prove that if0<k<np,where0<p<1andqD1p,then
k1
X
iD0
p
i
q
ni
<
kq
npk

np
k

k

nq
nk

nk
:
C.5-5?
Show that the conditions of Theorem C.8 imply that
Pr
f
Xr
g


.n/e
r

r
:
Similarly, show that the conditions of Corollary C.9 imply that
Pr
f
npXr
g


nqe
r

r
:

Problems for Appendix C1215
C.5-6?
Consider a sequence ofnBernoulli trials, where in theith trial, foriD1;2;:::;n,
success occurs with probabilityp
i
and failure occurs with probabilityq
i
D1p
i
.
LetXbe the random  variable  describing  the total  number  of  successes,  and let
DEŒX . Show that forr0,
Pr
f
Xr
g
e
r
2
=2n
:
(Hint:Prove thatp
i
e
 ̨q
i
Cq
i
e
 ̨p
i
e
 ̨
2
=2
.  Then follow the outline of the proof
of Theorem C.8, using this inequality in place of inequality (C.45).)
C.5-7?
Show  that  choosing ̨Dln.r=/minimizes  the  right-hand  side  of  inequal-
ity (C.47).
Problems
C-1  Balls and bins
In this problem, we investigate the effect of various assumptions on the number of
ways of placingnballs intobdistinct bins.
a.Suppose that thenballs are distinct and that their order within a bin does not
matter. Argue that the number of ways of placing the balls in the bins isb
n
.
b.Suppose that the balls are distinct  and that the balls in each bin are ordered.
Prove that there are exactly.bCn1/Š=.b1/Šways to place the balls in the
bins. (Hint:Consider the number of ways of arrangingndistinct balls andb1
indistinguishable sticks in a row.)
c.Suppose that the balls are identical, and hence their order within a bin does not
matter. Show that the number of ways of placing the balls in the bins is

bCn1
n

.
(Hint:Of the arrangements in part (b), how many are repeated if the balls are
made identical?)
d.Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may contain more than one
ball, so thatnb. Show that the number of ways of placing the balls is

b
n

.
e.Suppose that the balls are identical and that no bin may be left empty. Assuming
thatnb, show that the number of ways of placing the balls is

n1
b1

.

1216Appendix CCounting and Probability
Appendix notes
The  first  general  methods  for  solving  probability  problems  were  discussed  in  a
famous correspondence between B. Pascal and P. de Fermat, which began in 1654,
and in a book by C. Huygens in 1657. Rigorous probability theory began with the
work of J. Bernoulli in 1713 and A. De Moivre in 1730.  Further developments of
the theory were provided by P.-S. Laplace, S.-D. Poisson, and C. F. Gauss.
Sums of random variables were originally studied by P. L. Chebyshev and A. A.
Markov. A. N. Kolmogorov axiomatized probability theory in 1933. Chernoff [66]
and Hoeffding [173] provided bounds on the tails of distributions.  Seminal work
in random combinatorial structures was done by P. Erd  ̈os.
Knuth [209] and Liu [237] are good references  for  elementary  combinatorics
and counting. Standard textbooks such as Billingsley [46], Chung [67], Drake [95],
Feller [104], and Rozanov [300] offer comprehensive introductions to probability.

DMatrices
Matrices arise in numerous  applications,  including,  but by no means limited to,
scientific computing. If you have seen matrices before, much of the material in this
appendix will be familiar to you, but some of it might be new. Section D.1 covers
basic matrix definitions and operations, and Section D.2 presents some basic matrix
properties.
D.1  Matrices and matrix operations
In this section, we review some basic concepts of matrix theory and some funda-
mental properties of matrices.
Matrices and vectors
Amatrixis a rectangular array of numbers. For example,
AD

a
11
a
12
a
13
a
21
a
22
a
23

D

123
456

(D.1)
is a2	3matrixAD.a
ij
/, where foriD1; 2andjD1; 2; 3, we denote the
element  of the matrix in rowiand columnjbya
ij
.   We use  uppercase  letters
to denote matrices and corresponding subscripted lowercase letters to denote their
elements. We denote the set of allm	nmatrices with real-valued entries byR
mn
and, in general, the set ofm	nmatrices with entries drawn from a setSbyS
mn
.
Thetransposeof a matrixAis the matrixA
T
obtained by exchanging the rows
and columns ofA. For the matrixAof equation (D.1),

1218Appendix DMatrices
A
T
D

14
25
36

:
Avectoris a one-dimensional array of numbers. For example,
xD

2
3
5

is a vector  of  size3.   We sometimes  call  a vector  of  lengthnann-vector.We
use lowercase letters to denote vectors, and we denote theith element of a size-n
vectorxbyx
i
,foriD1;2;:::;n.  We take the standard form of a vector to be
as acolumn vectorequivalent to ann	1matrix; the correspondingrow vectoris
obtained by taking the transpose:
x
T
D.
235
/:
Theunit vectore
i
is  the  vector  whoseith  element  is1and  all  of  whose  other
elements are0. Usually, the size of a unit vector is clear from the context.
Azero matrixis a matrix  all of  whose entries  are0.   Such  a matrix  is often
denoted0, since the ambiguity between the number0and a matrix of0sisusually
easily  resolved  from  context.   If a matrix of0s is intended,  then the size of the
matrix also needs to be derived from the context.
Square matrices
Squaren	nmatrices arise frequently.  Several special cases of square matrices
are of particular interest:
1.   Adiagonal matrixhasa
ij
D0wheneveri¤j. Because all of the off-diagonal
elements are zero, we can specify the matrix by listing the elements along the
diagonal:
diag.a
11
;a
22
;:::;a
nn
/D
 ̇
a
11
0:::0
0a
22
:::0
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
00:::   a
nn

:
2.   Then	nidentity matrixI
n
is a diagonal matrix with1s along the diagonal:
I
n
Ddiag.1;1;:::;1/
D
 ̇
1   0   :::   0
0   1   :::   0
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
0   0   :::   1

:

D.1    Matrices and matrix operations1219
WhenIappears without a subscript, we derive its size from the context. Theith
column of an identity matrix is the unit vectore
i
.
3.  Atridiagonal matrixTis one for whicht
ij
D0if
j
ij
j
>1. Nonzero entries
appear only on the main diagonal, immediately above the main diagonal (t
i;iC1
foriD1;2;:::;n1), or immediately below the main diagonal  (t
iC1;i
for
iD1;2;:::;n1):
TD

t
11
t
12
00    :::000
t
21
t
22
t
23
0    :::000
0t
32
t
33
t
34
:::000
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
0000:::t
n2;n2
t
n2;n1
0
0000:::t
n1;n2
t
n1;n1
t
n1;n
0000:::   0t
n;n1
t
nn
 ̆
:
4.  Anupper-triangular matrixUis one for whichu
ij
D0ifi>j.  All entries
below the diagonal are zero:
UD
 ̇
u
11
u
12
:::   u
1n
0u
22
:::   u
2n
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
00:::   u
nn

:
An upper-triangular  matrix isunit upper-triangularif it has all1s along the
diagonal.
5.  Alower-triangular matrixLis one for whichl
ij
D0ifi<j.  All entries
above the diagonal are zero:
LD
 ̇
l
11
0    :::    0
l
21
l
22
:::    0
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
l
n1
l
n2
:::   l
nn

:
A  lower-triangular  matrix  isunit lower-triangularif  it  has  all1s  along  the
diagonal.

1220Appendix DMatrices
6.   Apermutation matrixPhas  exactly  one1in  each  row  or  column,  and0s
elsewhere. An example of a permutation matrix is
PD
ˇ
01000
00010
10000
00001
00100

:
Such a matrix is called a permutation  matrix because multiplying  a vectorx
by a permutation matrix has the effect of permuting (rearranging) the elements
ofx. Exercise D.1-4 explores additional properties of permutation matrices.
7.   Asymmetric matrixAsatisfies the conditionADA
T
. For example,

123
264
345

is a symmetric matrix.
Basic matrix operations
The elements of a matrix or vector are numbers from a number system,  such as
the real numbers, the complex numbers, or integers modulo a prime.  The number
system defines how to add and multiply numbers. We can extend these definitions
to encompass addition and multiplication of matrices.
We  defi nematrix additionas follows.  IfAD.a
ij
/andBD.b
ij
/arem	n
matrices, then their matrix sumCD.c
ij
/DACBis them	nmatrix defined by
c
ij
Da
ij
Cb
ij
foriD1;2;:::;mandjD1;2;:::;n.  That is, matrix addition is performed
componentwise. A zero matrix is the identity for matrix addition:
AC0DAD0CA:
Ifis a number  andAD.a
ij
/is a matrix,  thenAD.a
ij
/is thescalar
multipleofAobtained by multiplying each of its elements by. As a special case,
we define thenegativeof a matrixAD.a
ij
/to be1ADA, so that theijth
entry ofAisa
ij
. Thus,
AC.A/D0D.A/CA:

D.1    Matrices and matrix operations1221
We use the negative of a matrix to definematrix subtraction:ABDAC.B/.
We defi nematrix multiplicationas follows. We start with two matricesAandB
that arecompatiblein the sense that the number of columns ofAequals the number
of rows ofB. (In general, an expression containing a matrix productABis always
assumed to imply that matricesAandBare compatible.) IfAD.a
ik
/is anm	n
matrix andBD.b
kj
/is ann	pmatrix, then their matrix productCDABis the
m	pmatrixCD.c
ij
/,where
c
ij
D
n
X
kD1
a
ik
b
kj
(D.2)
foriD1;2;:::;mandjD1;2;:::;p.   The  procedure  S
QUARE-MAT R I X-
M
ULTIPLYin  Section  4.2  implements  matrix  multiplication  in  the  straightfor-
ward  manner  based  on  equation  (D.2),  assuming  that  the  matrices  are  square:
mDnDp.    To  multiplyn	nmatrices,  S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLYper-
formsn
3
multiplications andn
2
.n1/additions, and so its running time is‚.n
3
/.
Matrices have many (but not all) of the algebraic properties typical of numbers.
Identity matrices are identities for matrix multiplication:
I
m
ADAI
n
DA
for anym	nmatrixA. Multiplying by a zero matrix gives a zero matrix:
A0D0:
Matrix multiplication is associative:
A.BC /D.AB/C
for compatible matricesA,B,andC. Matrix multiplication distributes over addi-
tion:
A.BCC/DABCAC ;
.BCC/DDBDCCD :
Forn>1, multiplication ofn	nmatrices is not commutative.  For example, if
AD

01
00

andBD

00
10

,then
ABD

10
00

and
BAD

00
01

:

1222Appendix DMatrices
We define matrix-vector products or vector-vector products as if the vector were
the equivalentn	1matrix (or a1	nmatrix, in the case of a row vector).  Thus,
ifAis anm	nmatrix andxis ann-vector, thenAxis anm-vector.  Ifxandy
aren-vectors, then
x
T
yD
n
X
iD1
x
i
y
i
is a number (actually a1	1matrix) called theinner productofxandy.Thema-
trixxy
T
is ann	nmatrixZcalled theouter productofxandy, with ́
ij
Dx
i
y
j
.
The(euclidean) norm
k
x
k
of ann-vectorxis defined by
k
x
k
D.x
2
1
Cx
2
2
CCx
2
n
/
1=2
D.x
T
x/
1=2
:
Thus, the norm ofxis its length inn-dimensional euclidean space.
Exercises
D.1-1
Show that ifAandBare symmetricn	nmatrices, then so areACBandAB.
D.1-2
Prove that.AB/
T
DB
T
A
T
and thatA
T
Ais always a symmetric matrix.
D.1-3
Prove that the product of two lower-triangular matrices is lower-triangular.
D.1-4
Prove that ifPis ann	npermutation matrix andAis ann	nmatrix, then the
matrix productPAisAwith its rows permuted, and the matrix productAPisA
with its columns permuted.  Prove that the product of two permutation matrices is
a permutation matrix.
D.2  Basic matrix properties
In this section,  we define some basic properties pertaining to matrices:  inverses,
linear dependence and independence, rank, and determinants.  We also define the
class of positive-definite matrices.

D.2    Basic matrix properties1223
Matrix inverses, ranks, and determinants
We define theinverseof ann	nmatrixAto be then	nmatrix, denotedA
1
(if
it exists), such thatAA
1
DI
n
DA
1
A. For example,

11
10

1
D

01
11

:
Many nonzeron	nmatrices do not have inverses. A matrix without an inverse is
callednoninvertible,orsingular. An example of a nonzero singular matrix is

10
10

:
If a matrix has an inverse, it is calledinvertible,ornonsingular.  Matrix inverses,
when they exist,  are unique.  (See Exercise D.2-1.)  IfAandBare nonsingular
n	nmatrices, then
.BA/
1
DA
1
B
1
:
The inverse operation commutes with the transpose operation:
.A
1
/
T
D.A
T
/
1
:
The  vectorsx
1
;x
2
;:::;x
n
arelinearly dependentif  there  exist  coefficients
c
1
;c
2
;:::;c
n
, not all of which are zero, such thatc
1
x
1
Cc
2
x
2
CCc
n
x
n
D0.
The row vectorsx
1
D.
123
/,x
2
D.
264
/,andx
3
D.
4119
/are
linearly dependent,  for example, since2x
1
C3x
2
2x
3
D0.  If vectors are not
linearly dependent, they arelinearly independent. For example, the columns of an
identity matrix are linearly independent.
Thecolumn rankof  a nonzerom	nmatrixAis the size  of  the largest  set
of linearly  independent  columns ofA.  Similarly,  therow rankofAis the size
of the largest set of linearly independent  rows ofA.  A fundamental  property of
any matrixAis that its row rank always equals its column rank,  so that we can
simply refer to therankofA. The rank of anm	nmatrix is an integer between0
and min.m; n/, inclusive. (The rank of a zero matrix is0,andtherankofann	n
identity matrix isn.) An alternate, but equivalent and often more useful, definition
is that the rank of a nonzerom	nmatrixAis the smallest numberrsuch that
there exist matricesBandCof respective sizesm	randr	nsuch that
ADBC :
A squaren	nmatrix hasfull rankif its rank isn.Anm	nmatrix hasfull
column rankif its rank isn. The following theorem gives a fundamental property
of ranks.

1224Appendix DMatrices
Theorem D.1
A square matrix has full rank if and only if it is nonsingular.
Anull vectorfor  a matrixAis  a nonzero  vectorxsuch  thatAxD0.The
following theorem (whose proof is left as Exercise D.2-7) and its corollary relate
the notions of column rank and singularity to null vectors.
Theorem D.2
A matrixAhas full column rank if and only if it does not have a null vector.
Corollary D.3
A square matrixAis singular if and only if it has a null vector.
Theijthminorof ann	nmatrixA,forn>1,isthe.n1/	.n1/matrixA
Œij 
obtained by deleting theith row andjth column ofA.Wedefinethedeterminant
of ann	nmatrixArecursively in terms of its minors by
det.A/D
‚
a
11
ifnD1;
n
X
jD1
.1/
1Cj
a
1j
det.A
Œ1j 
/ifn>1:
The term.1/
iCj
det.A
Œij 
/is known as thecofactorof the elementa
ij
.
The following theorems,  whose proofs are omitted here,  express fundamental
properties of the determinant.
Theorem D.4 (Determinant properties)
The determinant of a square matrixAhas the following properties:

If any row or any column ofAis zero, then det.A/D0.

The determinant ofAis multiplied byif the entries of any one row (or any
one column) ofAare all multiplied by.

The determinant ofAis unchanged if the entries in one row (respectively, col-
umn) are added to those in another row (respectively, column).

The determinant ofAequals the determinant ofA
T
.

The determinant ofAis multiplied by1if any two rows (or any two columns)
are exchanged.
Also, for any square matricesAandB,wehavedet.AB/Ddet.A/det.B/.

D.2    Basic matrix properties1225
Theorem D.5
Ann	nmatrixAis singular if and only if det.A/D0.
Positive-definite matrices
Positive-definite matrices play an important role in many applications.  Ann	n
matrixAispositive-definiteifx
T
Ax   >   0for  alln-vectorsx¤0.For
example,  the  identity  matrix  is  positive-definite,  since  for  any  nonzero  vector
xD.
x
1
x
2
x
n
/
T
,
x
T
I
n
xDx
T
x
D
n
X
iD1
x
2
i
>0:
Matrices that arise in applications are often positive-definite due to the following
theorem.
Theorem D.6
For any matrixAwith full column rank, the matrixA
T
Ais positive-definite.
ProofWe must show  thatx
T
.A
T
A/x  >  0for  any nonzero  vectorx.Forany
vectorx,
x
T
.A
T
A/xD.Ax/
T
.Ax/(by Exercise D.1-2)
D
k
Ax
k
2
:
Note that
k
Ax
k
2
is just the sum of the squares of the elements of the vectorAx.
Therefore,
k
Ax
k
2
0.If
k
Ax
k
2
D0, every element ofAxis0, which is to say
AxD0.SinceAhas full column rank,AxD0impliesxD0, by Theorem D.2.
Hence,A
T
Ais positive-definite.
Section 28.3 explores other properties of positive-definite matrices.
Exercises
D.2-1
Prove that matrix inverses are unique, that is, ifBandCare inverses ofA,then
BDC.
D.2-2
Prove that the determinant of a lower-triangular or upper-triangular matrix is equal
to the product of its diagonal elements. Prove that the inverse of a lower-triangular
matrix, if it exists, is lower-triangular.

1226Appendix DMatrices
D.2-3
Prove that  ifPis a permutation  matrix,  thenPis invertible,  its inverse  isP
T
,
andP
T
is a permutation matrix.
D.2-4
LetAandBben	nmatrices such thatABDI.  Prove that ifA
0
is obtained
fromAby adding rowjinto rowi, then subtracting columnifrom columnjofB
yields the inverseB
0
ofA
0
.
D.2-5
LetAbe a nonsingularn	nmatrix with complex entries.  Show that every entry
ofA
1
is real if and only if every entry ofAis real.
D.2-6
Show that ifAis a nonsingular, symmetric,n	nmatrix, thenA
1
is symmetric.
Show that ifBis an arbitrarym	nmatrix, then them	mmatrix given by the
productBAB
T
is symmetric.
D.2-7
Prove Theorem D.2. That is, show that a matrixAhas full column rank if and only
ifAxD0impliesxD0.(Hint:Express the linear dependence of one column on
the others as a matrix-vector equation.)
D.2-8
Prove that for any two compatible matricesAandB,
rank.AB/min.rank.A/;rank.B// ;
where equality holds if eitherAorBis a nonsingular square matrix.  (Hint:Use
the alternate definition of the rank of a matrix.)
Problems
D-1  Vandermonde matrix
Given numbersx
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
, prove that the determinant of theVandermonde
matrix
V.x
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
/D
 ̇
1x
0
x
2
0
x
n1
0
1x
1
x
2
1
x
n1
1
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
:
1x
n1
x
2
n1
x
n1
n1


Problems for Appendix D1227
is
det.V .x
0
;x
1
;:::;x
n1
//D
Y
0j<kn1
.x
k
x
j
/:
(Hint:Multiply  columnibyx
0
and  add  it  to  columniC1foriDn1;
n2;:::;1, and then use induction.)
D-2  Permutations defined by matrix-vector multiplication over GF.2/
One class of permutations of the integers in the setS
n
D
f
0; 1; 2; : : : ; 2
n
1
g
is
defined by matrix multiplication overGF.2/. For each integerxinS
n
, we view its
binary representation as ann-bit vector

x
0
x
1
x
2
:
:
:
x
n1

;
wherexD
P
n1
iD0
x
i
2
i
.IfAis ann	nmatrix in which each entry is either0
or1, then we can define a permutation mapping each valuexinS
n
to the number
whose binary representation  is the matrix-vector  productAx.  Here, we perform
all arithmetic overGF.2/: all values are either0or1, and with one exception the
usual rules of addition and multiplication apply.  The exception is that1C1D0.
You can think of arithmetic overGF.2/as being just like regular integer arithmetic,
except that you use only the least significant bit.
As an example, forS
2
D
f
0; 1; 2; 3
g
, the matrix
AD

10
11

defines  the  following  permutation
A
:
A
.0/D0,
A
.1/D3,
A
.2/D2,

A
.3/D1. To see why
A
.3/D1, observe that, working inGF.2/,

A
.3/D

10
11

1
1

D

11C01
11C11

D

1
0

;
which is the binary representation of1.

1228Appendix DMatrices
For  the  remainder  of  this  problem,  we work  overGF.2/,  and  all  matrix  and
vector entries are0or1.  We define the rank of a 0-1 matrix (a matrix for which
each entry is either0or1) overGF.2/the same as for a regular matrix, but with all
arithmetic that determines linear independence performed overGF.2/.Wedefine
therangeof ann	n0-1 matrixAby
R.A/D
f
yWyDAxfor somex2S
n
g
;
so thatR.A/is the set of numbers inS
n
that we can produce by multiplying each
valuexinS
n
byA.
a.Ifris the rank of matrixA, prove that
j
R.A/
j
D2
r
. Conclude thatAdefines a
permutation onS
n
only ifAhas full rank.
For a givenn	nmatrixAand a given valuey2R.A/,wedefinethepreimage
ofyby
P.A;y/D
f
xWAxDy
g
;
so thatP.A;y/is the set of values inS
n
that map toywhen multiplied byA.
b.Ifris the rank ofn	nmatrixAandy2R.A/, prove that
j
P.A;y/
j
D2
nr
.
Let0mn,  and suppose  we partition  the setS
n
into blocks  of consec-
utive  numbers,  where  theith  block  consists  of  the2
m
numbersi2
m
;i2
m
C1;
i2
m
C2;:::;.iC1/2
m
1.  For any subsetSS
n
,defineB.S;m/to be the
set of size-2
m
blocks ofS
n
containing some element ofS.  As an example, when
nD3,mD1,andSD
f
1; 4; 5
g
,thenB.S;m/consists of blocks0(since1is in
the0th block) and2(since both4and5are in block2).
c.Letrbe the rank of the lower left.nm/	msubmatrix ofA,thatis,the
matrix  formed  by  taking  the  intersection  of the  bottomnmrows and  the
leftmostmcolumns  ofA.LetSbe any size-2
m
block  ofS
n
,andletS
0
D
f
yWyDAxfor somex2S
g
.  Prove that
j
B.S
0
;m/
j
D2
r
and that for each
block inB.S
0
;m/, exactly2
mr
numbers inSmap to that block.
Because multiplying the zero vector by any matrix yields a zero vector, the set
of permutations ofS
n
defined by multiplying byn	n0-1 matrices with full rank
overGF.2/cannot include all permutations ofS
n
.  Let us extend the class of per-
mutations defined by matrix-vector multiplication to include an additive term, so
thatx2S
n
maps toAxCc,wherecis ann-bit vector and addition is performed
overGF.2/. For example, when
AD

10
11


Notes for Appendix D1229
and
cD

0
1

;
we get the following permutation
A;c
:
A;c
.0/D2,
A;c
.1/D1,
A;c
.2/D0,

A;c
.3/D3. We call any permutation that mapsx2S
n
toAxCc,forsomen	n
0-1 matrixAwith full rank and somen-bit vectorc,alinear permutation.
d.Use a counting argument to show that the number of linear permutations ofS
n
is much less than the number of permutations ofS
n
.
e.Give an example of a value ofnand a permutation ofS
n
that cannot be achieved
by any linear  permutation.   (Hint:For a given permutation,  think about  how
multiplying a matrix by a unit vector relates to the columns of the matrix.)
Appendix notes
Linear-algebra textbooks provide plenty of background  information on matrices.
The books by Strang [323, 324] are particularly good.



Bibliography
[1]  Milton Abramowitz and Irene A. Stegun, editors.Handbook of Mathematical Functions.
Dover, 1965.
[2]  G. M. Adel’son-Vel’ski ̆ı and E. M. Landis.  An algorithm for the organization of information.
Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 3(5):1259–1263, 1962.
[3]  Alok Aggarwal and Jeffrey Scott Vitter. The input/output complexity of sorting and related
problems.Communications of the ACM, 31(9):1116–1127, 1988.
[4]  Manindra Agrawal, Neeraj Kayal, and Nitin Saxena.   PRIMES is in P.Annals of Mathe-
matics, 160(2):781–793, 2004.
[5]  Alfred  V.  Aho,  John  E.  Hopcroft,  and  Jeffrey  D.  Ullman.The  Design  and  Analysis  of
Computer Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, 1974.
[6]  Alfred V. Aho, John E. Hopcroft, and Jeffrey D. Ullman.Data Structures and Algorithms.
Addison-Wesley, 1983.
[7]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, Thomas L. Magnanti,  and James B. Orlin.Network Flows:  Theory,
Algorithms, and Applications. Prentice Hall, 1993.
[8]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, Kurt Mehlhorn, James B. Orlin, and Robert E. Tarjan. Faster algorithms
for the shortest path problem.Journal of the ACM, 37:213–223, 1990.
[9]  Ravindra K. Ahuja and James B. Orlin.  A fast and simple algorithm for the maximum flow
problem.Operations Research, 37(5):748–759, 1989.
[10]  Ravindra K. Ahuja, James B. Orlin, and Robert E. Tarjan.  Improved time bounds for the
maximum flow problem.SIAM Journal on Computing, 18(5):939–954, 1989.
[11]  Mikl  ́os  Ajtai,  Nimrod Megiddo,  and Orli Waarts.   Improved algorithms  and analysis  for
secretary problems and generalizations.  InProceedings of the 36th Annual Symposium on
Foundations of Computer Science, pages 473–482, 1995.
[12]  Selim G. Akl.The Design and Analysis of Parallel Algorithms. Prentice Hall, 1989.
[13]  Mohamad Akra and Louay Bazzi.  On the solution of linear recurrence equations.Compu-
tational Optimization and Applications, 10(2):195–210, 1998.
[14]  Noga Alon.  Generating pseudo-random permutations and maximum flow algorithms.In-
formation Processing Letters, 35:201–204, 1990.

1232Bibliography
[15]  Arne Andersson.  Balanced search trees made simple.  InProceedings of the Third Workshop
on  Algorithms  and  Data Structures,  volume  709  ofLecture  Notes  in Computer  Science,
pages 60–71. Springer, 1993.
[16]  Arne Andersson.  Faster deterministic sorting and searching in linear space. InProceedings
of the 37th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 135–141, 1996.
[17]  Arne Andersson,  Torben Hagerup,  StefanNilsson,  and Rajeev Raman.   Sorting in linear
time?Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 57:74–93, 1998.
[18]  Tom M. Apostol.Calculus, volume 1.  Blaisdell Publishing Company, second edition, 1967.
[19]  Nimar S. Arora, Robert D. Blumofe, and C. Greg Plaxton. Thread scheduling for multipro-
grammed multiprocessors.  InProceedings of the 10th Annual ACM Symposium on Parallel
Algorithms and Architectures, pages 119–129, 1998.
[20]  Sanjeev Arora.Probabilistic checking of proofs and the hardness of approximation prob-
lems. PhD thesis, University of California, Berkeley, 1994.
[21]  Sanjeev  Arora.   The  approximability  of  NP-hard  problems.   InProceedings  of  the  30th
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 337–348, 1998.
[22]  Sanjeev Arora.  Polynomial time approximation schemes for euclidean traveling salesman
and other geometric problems.Journal of the ACM, 45(5):753–782, 1998.
[23]  Sanjeev Arora  and Carsten Lund.   Hardness  of  approximations.   In Dorit S. Hochbaum,
editor,Approximation Algorithms for NP-Hard Problems, pages 399–446. PWS Publishing
Company, 1997.
[24]  Javed A. Aslam.  A simple bound on the expected height of a randomly built binary search
tree.  Technical Report TR2001-387, Dartmouth College Department of Computer Science,
2001.
[25]  Mikhail J. Atallah, editor.Algorithms and Theory of Computation Handbook.  CRC Press,
1999.
[26]  G. Ausiello, P. Crescenzi, G. Gambosi,V. Kann, A. Marchetti-Spaccamela, and M. Protasi.
Complexity and Approximation:  Combinatorial Optimization Problems and Their Approx-
imability Properties. Springer, 1999.
[27]  Shai Avidan and Ariel Shamir. Seam carving for content-aware image resizing.ACM Trans-
actions on Graphics, 26(3), article 10, 2007.
[28]  Sara Baase and Alan Van Gelder.Computer Algorithms: Introduction to Design and Anal-
ysis. Addison-Wesley, third edition, 2000.
[29]  Eric Bach. Private communication, 1989.
[30]  Eric Bach. Number-theoretic algorithms.  InAnnual Review of Computer Science, volume 4,
pages 119–172. Annual Reviews, Inc., 1990.
[31]  Eric Bach and Jeffrey Shallit.Algorithmic Number Theory—Volume I: Efficient Algorithms.
The MIT Press, 1996.
[32]  David H. Bailey, King Lee, and Horst D. Simon.  Using Strassen’s algorithm to accelerate
the solution of linear systems.The Journal of Supercomputing, 4(4):357–371, 1990.

Bibliography1233
[33]  Surender  Baswana,  Ramesh  Hariharan,  and  Sandeep  Sen.   Improved  decremental  algo-
rithms for maintaining transitive closure and all-pairs shortest paths.Journal of Algorithms,
62(2):74–92, 2007.
[34]  R. Bayer.   Symmetric binary B-trees:Data structure and  maintenance  algorithms.Acta
Informatica, 1(4):290–306, 1972.
[35]  R. Bayer and E. M. McCreight.   Organization and maintenance of large ordered indexes.
Acta Informatica, 1(3):173–189, 1972.
[36]  Pierre Beauchemin, Gilles Brassard, Claude Cr ́epeau, Claude Goutier, and Carl Pomerance.
The generation of random numbers that are probably prime.Journal of Cryptology, 1(1):53–
64, 1988.
[37]  Richard Bellman.Dynamic Programming.  Princeton University Press, 1957.
[38]  Richard Bellman.  On a routing problem.Quarterly of Applied Mathematics, 16(1):87–90,
1958.
[39]  Michael  Ben-Or.   Lower  bounds  for algebraic  computation trees.   InProceedings  of the
Fifteenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 80–86, 1983.
[40]  Michael A. Bender, Erik D. Demaine, and Martin Farach-Colton.  Cache-oblivious B-trees.
InProceedings of the 41st Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages
399–409, 2000.
[41]  Samuel W. Bent and John W. John.  Finding the median requires2ncomparisons.  InPro-
ceedings of the Seventeenth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 213–
216, 1985.
[42]  Jon L. Bentley.Writing Efficient Programs. Prentice Hall, 1982.
[43]  Jon L. Bentley.Programming Pearls. Addison-Wesley, 1986.
[44]  Jon L. Bentley, Dorothea Haken, and James B. Saxe.  A general method for solving divide-
and-conquer recurrences.SIGACT News, 12(3):36–44, 1980.
[45]  Daniel  Bienstock  and  Benjamin  McClosky.   Tightening  simplex  mixed-integer  sets  with
guaranteed bounds.Optimization Online, July 2008.
[46]  Patrick Billingsley.Probability and Measure.  John Wiley & Sons, second edition, 1986.
[47]  Guy E. Blelloch.Scan Primitives and Parallel Vector Models.  PhD thesis, Department of
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, 1989.  Available as MIT Laboratory for
Computer Science Technical Report MIT/LCS/TR-463.
[48]  Guy  E.  Blelloch.Programming  parallel  algorithms.Communications  of  the  ACM,
39(3):85–97, 1996.
[49]  Guy E. Blelloch, Phillip B. Gibbons, and Yossi Matias.  Provably efficient scheduling for
languages with fine-grained parallelism. InProceedings of the 7th Annual ACM Symposium
on Parallel Algorithms and Architectures, pages 1–12, 1995.
[50]  Manuel Blum,  Robert W. Floyd,  Vaughan Pratt, Ronald L. Rivest, and Robert E. Tarjan.
Time bounds for selection.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 7(4):448–461, 1973.
[51]  Robert  D.  Blumofe,  Christopher  F.  Joerg,  Bradley  C.  Kuszmaul,  Charles  E.  Leiserson,
Keith H. Randall, and Yuli Zhou.  Cilk: An efficient multithreaded runtime system.Journal
of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 37(1):55–69, 1996.

1234Bibliography
[52]  Robert D. Blumofe and Charles E. Leiserson.  Scheduling multithreaded computations by
work stealing.Journal of the ACM, 46(5):720–748, 1999.
[53]  B ́ela Bollob ́as.Random Graphs.  Academic Press, 1985.
[54]  Gilles Brassard and Paul Bratley.Fundamentals of Algorithmics. Prentice Hall, 1996.
[55]  Richard P. Brent.  The parallel evaluation of general arithmetic expressions.Journal of the
ACM, 21(2):201–206, 1974.
[56]  Richard P. Brent.  An improved Monte Carlo factorization algorithm.BIT, 20(2):176–184,
1980.
[57]  J. P. Buhler, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., and Carl Pomerance.  Factoring integers with the number
field sieve.  In A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., editors,The Development of the Number
Field Sieve, volume 1554 ofLecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 50–94. Springer, 1993.
[58]  J. Lawrence Carter and Mark N. Wegman.  Universal classes of hash functions.Journal of
Computer and System Sciences, 18(2):143–154, 1979.
[59]  Barbara Chapman, Gabriele Jost, and Ruud van der Pas.Using OpenMP: Portable Shared
Memory Parallel Programming. The MIT Press, 2007.
[60]  Bernard Chazelle. A minimum spanning treealgorithm with inverse-Ackermann type com-
plexity.Journal of the ACM, 47(6):1028–1047, 2000.
[61]  Joseph  Cheriyan  and  Torben  Hagerup.   A  randomized  maximum-flow  algorithm.SIAM
Journal on Computing, 24(2):203–226, 1995.
[62]  Joseph Cheriyan and S. N. Maheshwari.  Analysis of preflow push algorithms for maximum
network flow.SIAM Journal on Computing, 18(6):1057–1086, 1989.
[63]  Boris V. Cherkassky and Andrew V. Goldberg.  On implementing the push-relabel method
for the maximum flow problem.Algorithmica, 19(4):390–410, 1997.
[64]  Boris V. Cherkassky, Andrew V. Goldberg,and Tomasz Radzik.  Shortest paths algorithms:
Theory and experimental evaluation.Mathematical Programming, 73(2):129–174, 1996.
[65]  Boris V. Cherkassky, Andrew V. Goldberg, and Craig Silverstein.  Buckets, heaps, lists and
monotone priority queues.SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(4):1326–1346, 1999.
[66]  H. Chernoff. A measure of asymptotic efficiency for tests of a hypothesis based on the sum
of observations.Annals of Mathematical Statistics, 23(4):493–507, 1952.
[67]  Kai Lai Chung.Elementary Probability Theory with Stochastic Processes. Springer, 1974.
[68]  V. Chv ́atal.  A greedy heuristic for the set-covering problem.Mathematics of Operations
Research, 4(3):233–235, 1979.
[69]  V. Chv ́atal.Linear Programming.  W. H. Freeman and Company, 1983.
[70]  V.  Chv ́atal,  D. A. Klarner,  and D. E. Knuth.   Selected combinatorial  research problems.
Technical Report STAN-CS-72-292,  Computer Science Department,  Stanford University,
1972.
[71]  Cilk Arts, Inc., Burlington, Massachusetts.Cilk++ Programmer’s Guide, 2008.  Available
at http://www.cilk.com/archive/docs/cilk1guide.

Bibliography1235
[72]  Alan Cobham.  The intrinsic computational difficulty of functions.  InProceedings of the
1964 Congress for Logic, Methodology, and the Philosophy of Science, pages 24–30. North-
Holland, 1964.
[73]  H. Cohen and H. W. Lenstra, Jr.  Primality testing and Jacobi sums.Mathematics of Com-
putation, 42(165):297–330, 1984.
[74]  D. Comer. The ubiquitous B-tree.ACM Computing Surveys, 11(2):121–137, 1979.
[75]  Stephen Cook. The complexity of theorem proving procedures.  InProceedings of the Third
Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing, pages 151–158, 1971.
[76]  James W. Cooley and John W. Tukey.  An algorithm for the machine calculation of complex
Fourier series.Mathematics of Computation, 19(90):297–301, 1965.
[77]  Don  Coppersmith.Modifications  to  the  number  field  sieve.Journal  of  Cryptology,
6(3):169–180, 1993.
[78]  Don Coppersmith and Shmuel Winograd.  Matrix multiplication via arithmetic progression.
Journal of Symbolic Computation, 9(3):251–280, 1990.
[79]  Thomas H. Cormen, Thomas Sundquist, and Leonard F. Wisniewski.  Asymptotically tight
bounds  for performing BMMC permutations on parallel disk systems.SIAM Journal  on
Computing, 28(1):105–136, 1998.
[80]  Don Dailey and Charles E. Leiserson.Using Cilk to write multiprocessor chess programs.
In H. J. van den Herik and B. Monien, editors,Advances in Computer Games, volume 9,
pages 25–52. University of Maastricht, Netherlands, 2001.
[81]  Paolo D’Alberto and  Alexandru  Nicolau.   Adaptive  Strassen’s  matrix multiplication.   In
Proceedings of the 21st Annual International Conference on Supercomputing, pages 284–
292, June 2007.
[82]  Sanjoy Dasgupta, Christos Papadimitriou, and Umesh Vazirani.Algorithms. McGraw-Hill,
2008.
[83]  Roman Dementiev, Lutz Kettner, Jens Mehnert, and Peter Sanders. Engineering a sorted list
data structure for 32 bit keys.  InProceedings of the Sixth Workshop on Algorithm Engineer-
ing and Experiments and the First Workshop on Analytic Algorithmics and Combinatorics,
pages 142–151, January 2004.
[84]  Camil Demetrescu and Giuseppe F. Italiano. Fully dynamic all pairs shortest paths with real
edge weights.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 72(5):813–837, 2006.
[85]  Eric V. Denardo and Bennett L. Fox.  Shortest-route methods:  1. Reaching, pruning,  and
buckets.Operations Research, 27(1):161–186, 1979.
[86]  Martin Dietzfelbinger, Anna Karlin, Kurt Mehlhorn, Friedhelm Meyer auf der Heide, Hans
Rohnert, and Robert E. Tarjan.  Dynamic perfect hashing:  Upper and lower bounds.SIAM
Journal on Computing, 23(4):738–761, 1994.
[87]  Whitfield Diffie and Martin E. Hellman.  New directions in cryptography.IEEE Transac-
tions on Information Theory, IT-22(6):644–654, 1976.
[88]  E. W. Dijkstra. A note on two problems in connexion with graphs.Numerische Mathematik,
1(1):269–271, 1959.

1236Bibliography
[89]  E. A. Dinic. Algorithm for solution of a problem of maximum flow in a network with power
estimation.Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 11(5):1277–1280, 1970.
[90]  Brandon Dixon, Monika Rauch, and Robert E. Tarjan.  Verification and sensitivity analysis
of minimum spanning trees in linear time.SIAM Journal on Computing, 21(6):1184–1192,
1992.
[91]  John D. Dixon.   Factorization and primality tests.The American Mathematical Monthly,
91(6):333–352, 1984.
[92]  Dorit Dor, Johan H ̊astad, Staffan Ulfberg, and Uri Zwick.  On lower bounds for selecting
the median.SIAM Journal on Discrete Mathematics, 14(3):299–311, 2001.
[93]  Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick. Selecting the median.SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(5):1722–
1758, 1999.
[94]  Dorit Dor and Uri Zwick.  Median selection requires.2C/ncomparisons.SIAM Journal
on Discrete Mathematics, 14(3):312–325, 2001.
[95]  Alvin W. Drake.Fundamentals of Applied Probability Theory. McGraw-Hill, 1967.
[96]  James R. Driscoll, Harold N. Gabow, Ruth Shrairman, and Robert E. Tarjan. Relaxed heaps:
An alternative to Fibonacci heaps with applications to parallel computation.Communica-
tions of the ACM, 31(11):1343–1354, 1988.
[97]  James  R.  Driscoll,  Neil  Sarnak,  Daniel  D.  Sleator,  and  Robert  E.  Tarjan.   Making  data
structures persistent.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 38(1):86–124, 1989.
[98]  Derek L. Eager, John Zahorjan,  and Edward D. Lazowska.   Speedup versus efficiency in
parallel systems.IEEE Transactions on Computers, 38(3):408–423, 1989.
[99]  Herbert Edelsbrunner.Algorithms in Combinatorial Geometry, volume 10 ofEATCS Mono-
graphs on Theoretical Computer Science.  Springer, 1987.
[100]  Jack Edmonds.  Paths, trees, and flowers.Canadian Journal of Mathematics, 17:449–467,
1965.
[101]  Jack Edmonds.  Matroids and the greedy algorithm.Mathematical Programming, 1(1):127–
136, 1971.
[102]  Jack  Edmonds  and  Richard M.  Karp.   Theoretical  improvements  in the  algorithmic  effi-
ciency for network flow problems.Journal of the ACM, 19(2):248–264, 1972.
[103]  Shimon Even.Graph Algorithms. Computer Science Press, 1979.
[104]  William Feller.An Introduction to ProbabilityTheory and Its Applications.  John Wiley &
Sons, third edition, 1968.
[105]  Robert  W.  Floyd.    Algorithm  97  (SHORTEST  PATH).Communications  of  the  ACM,
5(6):345, 1962.
[106]  Robert W. Floyd.  Algorithm 245 (TREESORT).Communications of the ACM, 7(12):701,
1964.
[107]  Robert W. Floyd.   Permuting information in idealized two-level storage.   In Raymond E.
Miller and James W. Thatcher, editors,Complexity of Computer Computations, pages 105–
109. Plenum Press, 1972.

Bibliography1237
[108]  Robert W. Floyd and Ronald L. Rivest.  Expected time bounds for selection.Communica-
tions of the ACM, 18(3):165–172, 1975.
[109]  Lestor R. Ford, Jr. and D. R. Fulkerson.Flows in Networks.  Princeton University Press,
1962.
[110]  Lestor R. Ford, Jr. and Selmer M. Johnson.  A tournament problem.The American Mathe-
matical Monthly, 66(5):387–389, 1959.
[111]  Michael L. Fredman.  New bounds on the complexity of the shortest path problem.SIAM
Journal on Computing, 5(1):83–89, 1976.
[112]  Michael L. Fredman, J ́anos Koml  ́os, and Endre Szemer ́edi. Storing a sparse table withO.1/
worst case access time.Journal of the ACM, 31(3):538–544, 1984.
[113]  Michael L. Fredman and Michael E. Saks.  The cell probe complexity of dynamic data struc-
tures. InProceedings of the Twenty First Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of Computing,
pages 345–354, 1989.
[114]  Michael  L.  Fredman and  Robert  E. Tarjan.   Fibonacci  heaps  and their  uses  in improved
network optimization algorithms.Journal of the ACM, 34(3):596–615, 1987.
[115]  Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. Willard.  Surpassing the information theoretic bound with
fusion trees.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 47(3):424–436, 1993.
[116]  Michael L. Fredman and Dan E. Willard. Trans-dichotomous algorithms for minimum span-
ning trees and shortest paths.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 48(3):533–551,
1994.
[117]  Matteo Frigo and Steven G. Johnson.  The design and implementation of FFTW3.Proceed-
ings of the IEEE, 93(2):216–231, 2005.
[118]  Matteo Frigo, Charles E. Leiserson, and Keith H. Randall.  The implementation of the Cilk-5
multithreaded language.   InProceedings of the 1998 ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Pro-
gramming Language Design and Implementation, pages 212–223, 1998.
[119]  Harold N. Gabow.   Path-based depth-first search for strong and biconnected components.
Information Processing Letters, 74(3–4):107–114, 2000.
[120]  Harold N. Gabow, Z. Galil, T. Spencer, and Robert E. Tarjan.  Efficient algorithms for find-
ing minimum spanning trees in undirected and directed graphs.Combinatorica, 6(2):109–
122, 1986.
[121]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert E. Tarjan. A linear-time algorithm for a special case of disjoint
set union.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 30(2):209–221, 1985.
[122]  Harold N. Gabow and Robert E. Tarjan.  Faster scaling algorithms for network problems.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 18(5):1013–1036, 1989.
[123]  Zvi  Galil and  Oded  Margalit.   All  pairs  shortest  distances  for  graphs  with small  integer
length edges.Information and Computation, 134(2):103–139, 1997.
[124]  Zvi Galil and Oded Margalit.  All pairs shortest paths for graphs with small integer length
edges.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 54(2):243–254, 1997.
[125]  Zvi Galil and Kunsoo Park.  Dynamic programming with convexity, concavity and sparsity.
Theoretical Computer Science, 92(1):49–76, 1992.

1238Bibliography
[126]  Zvi Galil and Joel Seiferas. Time-space-optimal string matching.Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 26(3):280–294, 1983.
[127]  Igal Galperin and Ronald L. Rivest. Scapegoat trees. InProceedings of the 4th ACM-SIAM
Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 165–174, 1993.
[128]  Michael  R.  Garey,  R.  L. Graham,  and  J.  D. Ullman.   Worst-case analyis  of  memory  al-
location algorithms.  InProceedings of the Fourth Annual ACM Symposium on Theory of
Computing, pages 143–150, 1972.
[129]  Michael  R. Garey and David S. Johnson.Computers and Intractability:  A Guide to the
Theory of NP-Completeness. W. H. Freeman, 1979.
[130]  Saul Gass.Linear Programming:  Methods and Applications.  International Thomson Pub-
lishing, fourth edition, 1975.
[131]  F ̆anic ̆a Gavril.  Algorithms for minimum coloring, maximum clique, minimum covering by
cliques, and maximum independent set of a chordal graph.SIAM Journal on Computing,
1(2):180–187, 1972.
[132]  Alan George and Joseph W-H Liu.Computer Solution of Large Sparse Positive Definite
Systems.  Prentice Hall, 1981.
[133]  E. N. Gilbert and E. F. Moore.   Variable-length binary encodings.Bell System Technical
Journal, 38(4):933–967, 1959.
[134]  Michel  X.  Goemans  and  David  P.  Williamson.   Improved  approximation  algorithms  for
maximum cut and satisfiability problems using semidefinite programming.Journal of the
ACM, 42(6):1115–1145, 1995.
[135]  Michel X. Goemans and David P. Williamson.  The primal-dual method for approximation
algorithms and its application to network design problems.  In Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor,
Approximation Algorithms for NP-Hard Problems, pages 144–191. PWS Publishing Com-
pany, 1997.
[136]  Andrew V. Goldberg.Efficient Graph Algorithms for Sequential and Parallel Computers.
PhD thesis, Department of Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, MIT, 1987.
[137]  Andrew V. Goldberg.  Scaling algorithms for the shortest paths problem.SIAM Journal on
Computing, 24(3):494–504, 1995.
[138]  Andrew V. Goldberg and Satish Rao.  Beyond the flow decomposition barrier.Journal of
the ACM, 45(5):783–797, 1998.
[139]  Andrew V. Goldberg,
 ́
Eva Tardos, and Robert E. Tarjan. Network flow algorithms. In Bern-
hard Korte, L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz, Hans J  ̈urgen Pr  ̈omel, and Alexander Schrijver, editors,Pat hs,
Flows, and VLSI-Layout, pages 101–164. Springer, 1990.
[140]  Andrew V. Goldberg and Robert E. Tarjan. A new approach to the maximum flow problem.
Journal of the ACM, 35(4):921–940, 1988.
[141]  D. Goldfarb and M. J. Todd.  Linear programming.  In G. L. Nemhauser, A. H. G. Rinnooy-
Kan, and M. J. Todd, editors,Handbook in Operations Research and Management Science,
Vol. 1, Optimization, pages 73–170. Elsevier Science Publishers, 1989.
[142]  Shafi Goldwasser and Silvio Micali.   Probabilistic encryption.Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 28(2):270–299, 1984.

Bibliography1239
[143]  Shafi Goldwasser, Silvio Micali, and Ronald L. Rivest.  A digital signature scheme secure
against  adaptive  chosen-message  attacks.SIAM  Journal  on  Computing,  17(2):281–308,
1988.
[144]  Gene H. Golub and Charles F. Van Loan.Matrix Computations.  The Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, third edition, 1996.
[145]  G. H. Gonnet.Handbook of Algorithms and Data Structures.  Addison-Wesley, 1984.
[146]  Rafael C. Gonzalez and Richard E. Woods.Digital Image Processing.   Addison-Wesley,
1992.
[147]  Michael T. Goodrich and Roberto Tamassia.Data Structures and Algorithms in Java.  John
Wiley & Sons, 1998.
[148]  Michael T. Goodrich and Roberto Tamassia.Algorithm Design: Foundations, Analysis, and
Internet Examples. John Wiley & Sons, 2001.
[149]  Ronald L. Graham.   Bounds for certain multiprocessor anomalies.Bell System Technical
Journal, 45(9):1563–1581, 1966.
[150]  Ronald L. Graham. An efficient algorithm for determining the convex hull of a finite planar
set.Information Processing Letters, 1(4):132–133, 1972.
[151]  Ronald L. Graham and Pavol Hell.  On the history of the minimum spanning tree problem.
Annals of the History of Computing, 7(1):43–57, 1985.
[152]  Ronald  L.  Graham,  Donald  E.  Knuth,  and  Oren  Patashnik.Concrete  Mathematics.
Addison-Wesley, second edition, 1994.
[153]  David Gries.The Science of Programming. Springer, 1981.
[154]  M. Gr  ̈otschel, L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz, and Alexander Schrijver.Geometric Algorithms and Combi-
natorial Optimization. Springer, 1988.
[155]  Leo J. Guibas  and Robert  Sedgewick.   A  dichromatic  framework  for balanced  trees.   In
Proceedings  of the  19th Annual  Symposium  on Foundations  of Computer  Science,  pages
8–21, 1978.
[156]  Dan Gusfield.Algorithms on Strings, Trees, and Sequences:  Computer Science and Com-
putational Biology. Cambridge University Press, 1997.
[157]  H. Halberstam and R. E. Ingram, editors.The Mathematical Papers of Sir William Rowan
Hamilton, volume III (Algebra). Cambridge University Press, 1967.
[158]  Yijie Han.  Improved fast integer sorting in linear space.  InProceedings of the 12th ACM-
SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 793–796, 2001.
[159]  Yijie Han.  AnO.n
3
.log logn=logn/
5=4
/time algorithm for all pairs shortest path.Algo-
rithmica, 51(4):428–434, 2008.
[160]  Frank Harary.Graph Theory. Addison-Wesley, 1969.
[161]  Gregory C. Harfst and Edward M. Reingold.  A potential-based amortized analysis of the
union-find data structure.SIGACT News, 31(3):86–95, 2000.
[162]  J. Hartmanis and R. E. Stearns.  On the computational complexity of algorithms.Transac-
tions of the American Mathematical Society, 117:285–306, May 1965.

1240Bibliography
[163]  Michael T. Heideman, Don H. Johnson, and C. Sidney Burrus. Gauss and the history of the
Fast Fourier Transform.IEEE ASSP Magazine, 1(4):14–21, 1984.
[164]  Monika R. Henzinger and Valerie King.  Fully dynamic biconnectivity and transitive clo-
sure.  InProceedings of the 36th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science,
pages 664–672, 1995.
[165]  Monika R. Henzinger and Valerie King.  Randomized fully dynamic graph algorithms with
polylogarithmic time per operation.Journal of the ACM, 46(4):502–516, 1999.
[166]  Monika R. Henzinger, Satish Rao, and Harold N. Gabow.  Computing vertex connectivity:
New bounds from old techniques.Journal of Algorithms, 34(2):222–250, 2000.
[167]  Nicholas J. Higham.  Exploiting fast matrix multiplication within the level 3 BLAS.ACM
Transactions on Mathematical Software, 16(4):352–368, 1990.
[168]  W. Daniel Hillis and Jr. Guy L. Steele.  Data parallel algorithms.Communications of the
ACM, 29(12):1170–1183, 1986.
[169]  C. A. R. Hoare.  Algorithm 63 (PARTITION) and algorithm 65 (FIND).Communications
of the ACM, 4(7):321–322, 1961.
[170]  C. A. R. Hoare. Quicksort.Computer Journal, 5(1):10–15, 1962.
[171]  Dorit S. Hochbaum.  Efficient bounds for the stable set, vertex cover and set packing prob-
lems.Discrete Applied Mathematics, 6(3):243–254, 1983.
[172]  Dorit S. Hochbaum, editor.Approximation Algorithms for NP-Hard Problems.  PWS Pub-
lishing Company, 1997.
[173]  W. Hoeffding.  On the distribution of the number of successes in independent trials.Annals
of Mathematical Statistics, 27(3):713–721, 1956.
[174]  Micha Hofri.Probabilistic Analysis of Algorithms. Springer, 1987.
[175]  Micha Hofri.Analysis of Algorithms. Oxford University Press, 1995.
[176]  John E. Hopcroft  and Richard M. Karp.   Ann
5=2
algorithm  for maximum  matchings  in
bipartite graphs.SIAM Journal on Computing, 2(4):225–231, 1973.
[177]  John E. Hopcroft, Rajeev Motwani, and Jeffrey D. Ullman.Introduction to Automata The-
ory, Languages, and Computation.  Addison Wesley, third edition, 2006.
[178]  John E. Hopcroft and Robert E. Tarjan.  Efficient algorithms for graph manipulation.Com-
munications of the ACM, 16(6):372–378, 1973.
[179]  John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman.  Set merging algorithms.SIAM Journal on Com-
puting, 2(4):294–303, 1973.
[180]  John E. Hopcroft and Jeffrey D. Ullman.Introduction to Automata Theory, Languages, and
Computation.  Addison-Wesley, 1979.
[181]  Ellis Horowitz, Sartaj Sahni, and Sanguthevar Rajasekaran.Computer Algorithms.Com-
puter Science Press, 1998.
[182]  T. C. Hu and M. T. Shing.  Computation of matrix chain products. Part I.SIAM Journal on
Computing, 11(2):362–373, 1982.
[183]  T. C. Hu and M. T. Shing. Computation of matrix chain products. Part II.SIAM Journal on
Computing, 13(2):228–251, 1984.

Bibliography1241
[184]  T. C. Hu and A. C. Tucker.  Optimal computer search trees and variable-length alphabetic
codes.SIAM Journal on Applied Mathematics, 21(4):514–532, 1971.
[185]  David A. Huffman.  A method for the construction of minimum-redundancy codes.Pro-
ceedings of the IRE, 40(9):1098–1101, 1952.
[186]  Steven Huss-Lederman, Elaine M. Jacobson, Jeremy R. Johnson, Anna Tsao, and Thomas
Turnbull. Implementation of Strassen’s algorithm for matrix multiplication. InProceedings
of the 1996 ACM/IEEE Conference on Supercomputing, article 32, 1996.
[187]  Oscar H. Ibarra and Chul E. Kim. Fast approximation algorithms for the knapsack and sum
of subset problems.Journal of the ACM, 22(4):463–468, 1975.
[188]  E.  J.  Isaac  and  R.  C.  Singleton.    Sorting  by  address  calculation.Journal  of  the  ACM,
3(3):169–174, 1956.
[189]  R. A. Jarvis.  On the identification of the convex hull of a finite set of points in the plane.
Information Processing Letters, 2(1):18–21, 1973.
[190]  David S. Johnson.  Approximation algorithms for combinatorial problems.Journal of Com-
puter and System Sciences, 9(3):256–278, 1974.
[191]  David S. Johnson.  The NP-completeness column:  An ongoing guide—The tale of the sec-
ond prover.Journal of Algorithms, 13(3):502–524, 1992.
[192]  Donald B. Johnson.  Efficient algorithms for shortest paths in sparse networks.Journal of
the ACM, 24(1):1–13, 1977.
[193]  Richard Johnsonbaugh and Marcus Schaefer.Algorithms. Pearson Prentice Hall, 2004.
[194]  A. Karatsuba and Yu. Ofman.   Multiplication of multidigit numbers on automata.Soviet
Physics—Doklady, 7(7):595–596, 1963.  Translation of an article inDoklady Akademii Nauk
SSSR, 145(2), 1962.
[195]  David R. Karger, Philip N. Klein, and Robert E. Tarjan. A randomized linear-time algorithm
to find minimum spanning trees.Journal of the ACM, 42(2):321–328, 1995.
[196]  David R. Karger,  Daphne  Koller,  and Steven J. Phillips.   Finding the hidden path:  Time
bounds for all-pairs shortest paths.SIAM Journal on Computing, 22(6):1199–1217, 1993.
[197]  Howard Karloff.Linear Programming.Birkh ̈auser, 1991.
[198]  N. Karmarkar.  A new polynomial-time algorithm for linear programming.Combinatorica,
4(4):373–395, 1984.
[199]  Richard M. Karp.  Reducibility among combinatorial problems.  In Raymond E. Miller and
James W. Thatcher, editors,Complexity of Computer Computations, pages 85–103. Plenum
Press, 1972.
[200]  Richard M. Karp.  An introduction to randomized algorithms.Discrete Applied Mathemat-
ics, 34(1–3):165–201, 1991.
[201]  Richard M. Karp and Michael O. Rabin.  Efficient randomized pattern-matching algorithms.
IBM Journal of Research and Development, 31(2):249–260, 1987.
[202]  A. V. Karzanov.   Determining the maximal flow in a network by the method of preflows.
Soviet Mathematics Doklady, 15(2):434–437, 1974.

1242Bibliography
[203]  Valerie  King.   A  simpler  minimum  spanning  tree  verification  algorithm.Algorithmica,
18(2):263–270, 1997.
[204]  Valerie King, Satish Rao, and Robert E. Tarjan. A faster deterministic maximum flow algo-
rithm.Journal of Algorithms, 17(3):447–474, 1994.
[205]  Jeffrey  H.  Kingston.Algorithms  and  Data  Structures:   Design,  Correctness,  Analysis.
Addison-Wesley, second edition, 1997.
[206]  D. G. Kirkpatrick and R. Seidel. The ultimate planar convex hull algorithm?SIAM Journal
on Computing, 15(2):287–299, 1986.
[207]  Philip N. Klein and Neal E. Young.  Approximation algorithms for NP-hard optimization
problems.  InCRC Handbook on Algorithms, pages 34-1–34-19. CRC Press, 1999.
[208]  Jon Kleinberg and
 ́
Eva Tardos.Algorithm Design.  Addison-Wesley, 2006.
[209]  Donald E. Knuth.Fundamental Algorithms, volume 1 ofThe Art of Computer Program-
ming. Addison-Wesley, 1968.  Third edition, 1997.
[210]  Donald E. Knuth.Seminumerical Algorithms, volume 2 ofThe Art of Computer Program-
ming. Addison-Wesley, 1969.  Third edition, 1997.
[211]  Donald E. Knuth.Sorting and Searching, volume 3 ofThe Art of Computer Programming.
Addison-Wesley, 1973.  Second edition, 1998.
[212]  Donald E. Knuth. Optimum binary search trees.Acta Informatica, 1(1):14–25, 1971.
[213]  Donald E. Knuth.  Big omicron and big omega and big theta.SIGACT News, 8(2):18–23,
1976.
[214]  Donald E. Knuth,  James H. Morris,  Jr.,  and Vaughan R. Pratt.   Fast pattern matching in
strings.SIAM Journal on Computing, 6(2):323–350, 1977.
[215]  J. Koml  ́os. Linear verification for spanning trees.Combinatorica, 5(1):57–65, 1985.
[216]  Bernhard Korte and L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz. Mathematical structures underlying greedy algorithms.
In F. Gecseg, editor,Fundamentals of Computation Theory, volume 117 ofLecture Notes in
Computer Science, pages 205–209. Springer, 1981.
[217]  Bernhard  Korte  and  L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz.   Structural properties  of  greedoids.Combinatorica,
3(3–4):359–374, 1983.
[218]  Bernhard  Korte  and  L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz.   Greedoids—A  structural  framework  for  the  greedy
algorithm.  In W. Pulleybank, editor,Progress in Combinatorial Optimization, pages 221–
243. Academic Press, 1984.
[219]  Bernhard Korte and L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz.  Greedoids and linear objective functions.SIAM Journal
on Algebraic and Discrete Methods, 5(2):229–238, 1984.
[220]  Dexter C. Kozen.The Design and Analysis of Algorithms. Springer, 1992.
[221]  David W. Krumme, George Cybenko, and K. N. Venkataraman.  Gossiping in minimal time.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 21(1):111–139, 1992.
[222]  Joseph B. Kruskal, Jr. On the shortest spanning subtree of a graph and the traveling salesman
problem.Proceedings of the American Mathematical Society, 7(1):48–50, 1956.
[223]  Leslie Lamport.  How to make a multiprocessor computer that correctly executes multipro-
cess programs.IEEE Transactions on Computers, C-28(9):690–691, 1979.

Bibliography1243
[224]  Eugene L. Lawler.Combinatorial Optimization:  Networks and Matroids.  Holt, Rinehart,
and Winston, 1976.
[225]  Eugene L. Lawler, J. K. Lenstra, A. H. G. Rinnooy Kan, and D. B. Shmoys, editors.The
Traveling Salesman Problem. John Wiley & Sons, 1985.
[226]  C. Y.  Lee.   An algorithm  for path connection  and its applications.IRE Transactions  on
Electronic Computers, EC-10(3):346–365, 1961.
[227]  Tom Leighton.  Tight bounds on the complexity of parallel sorting.IEEE Transactions on
Computers, C-34(4):344–354, 1985.
[228]  Tom Leighton.  Notes on better master theorems for divide-and-conquer recurrences.  Class
notes. Available at http://citeseer.ist.psu.edu/252350.html, October 1996.
[229]  Tom Leighton and Satish Rao.  Multicommodity max-flow min-cut theorems and their use
in designing approximation algorithms.Journal of the ACM, 46(6):787–832, 1999.
[230]  Daan  Leijen  and  Judd  Hall.   Optimize  managed  code  for  multi-core  machines.MSDN
Magazine, October 2007.
[231]  Debra A. Lelewer and Daniel S. Hirschberg.  Data compression.ACM Computing Surveys,
19(3):261–296, 1987.
[232]  A. K. Lenstra, H. W. Lenstra, Jr., M. S. Manasse, and J. M. Pollard. The number field sieve.
In A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., editors,The Development of the Number Field Sieve,
volume 1554 ofLecture Notes in Mathematics, pages 11–42. Springer, 1993.
[233]  H.  W.  Lenstra,  Jr.Factoring  integers  with  elliptic  curves.Annals  of  Mathematics,
126(3):649–673, 1987.
[234]  L. A. Levin.  Universal sorting problems.Problemy Peredachi Informatsii, 9(3):265–266,
1973.  In Russian.
[235]  Anany  Levitin.Introduction  to the  Design  &  Analysis  of  Algorithms.   Addison-Wesley,
2007.
[236]  Harry R. Lewis and Christos H. Papadimitriou.Elements of the Theory of Computation.
Prentice Hall, second edition, 1998.
[237]  C. L. Liu.Introduction to Combinatorial Mathematics.  McGraw-Hill, 1968.
[238]  L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz.  On the ratio of optimal integral and fractional covers.Discrete Mathemat-
ics, 13(4):383–390, 1975.
[239]  L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz and M. D. Plummer.Matching Theory, volume 121 ofAnnals of Discrete
Mathematics. North Holland, 1986.
[240]  Bruce  M.  Maggs  and  Serge  A.  Plotkin.   Minimum-cost  spanning  tree  as  a  path-finding
problem.Information Processing Letters, 26(6):291–293, 1988.
[241]  Michael Main.Data Structures and Other Objects Using Java.  Addison-Wesley, 1999.
[242]  Udi Manber.Introduction to Algorithms: A Creative Approach.  Addison-Wesley, 1989.
[243]  Conrado Mart ́ınez and Salvador Roura.   Randomized binary search trees.Journal of the
ACM, 45(2):288–323, 1998.
[244]  William J. Masek and Michael S. Paterson.  A faster algorithm computing string edit dis-
tances.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 20(1):18–31, 1980.

1244Bibliography
[245]  H. A. Maurer, Th. Ottmann, and H.-W. Six. Implementing dictionaries using binary trees of
very small height.Information Processing Letters, 5(1):11–14, 1976.
[246]  Ernst W. Mayr, Hans J  ̈urgen Pr  ̈omel, and Angelika Steger, editors.Lectures on Proof Verifi-
cation and Approximation Algorithms, volume 1367 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science.
Springer, 1998.
[247]  C.  C.  McGeoch.All  pairs  shortest  paths  and  the  essential  subgraph.Algorithmica,
13(5):426–441, 1995.
[248]  M.  D.  McIlroy.    A  killer  adversary  for  quicksort.Software—Practice  and  Experience,
29(4):341–344, 1999.
[249]  Kurt  Mehlhorn.Sorting  and  Searching,  volume  1  ofData  Structures  and  Algorithms.
Springer, 1984.
[250]  Kurt Mehlhorn.Graph Algorithms and NP-Completeness, volume 2 ofData Structures and
Algorithms. Springer, 1984.
[251]  Kurt Mehlhorn.Multidimensional Searching and Computational Geometry,  volume 3 of
Data Structures and Algorithms. Springer, 1984.
[252]  Kurt Mehlhorn and Stefan N ̈aher.  Bounded ordered dictionaries inO.log logN/time and
O.n/space.Information Processing Letters, 35(4):183–189, 1990.
[253]  Kurt  Mehlhorn and  Stefan N ̈aher.LEDA: A Platform for Combinatorial  and  Geometric
Computing.  Cambridge University Press, 1999.
[254]  Alfred J. Menezes,  Paul C. van Oorschot,  and Scott A. Vanstone.Handbook  of Applied
Cryptography.  CRC Press, 1997.
[255]  Gary L. Miller.   Riemann’s hypothesis and tests for primality.Journal of Computer and
System Sciences, 13(3):300–317, 1976.
[256]  John C. Mitchell.Foundations for Programming Languages.  The MIT Press, 1996.
[257]  Joseph S. B. Mitchell. Guillotine subdivisions approximate polygonal subdivisions: A sim-
ple polynomial-time approximation scheme for geometric TSP,k-MST, and related prob-
lems.SIAM Journal on Computing, 28(4):1298–1309, 1999.
[258]  Louis Monier.Algorithmes de Factorisation D’Entiers. PhD thesis, L’Universit ́e Paris-Sud,
1980.
[259]  Louis Monier.   Evaluation and comparison of two efficient probabilistic primality testing
algorithms.Theoretical Computer Science, 12(1):97–108, 1980.
[260]  Edward F. Moore.  The shortest path through a maze.  InProceedings of the International
Symposium on the Theory of Switching, pages 285–292. Harvard University Press, 1959.
[261]  Rajeev Motwani, Joseph (Seffi) Naor, and Prabakhar Raghavan.  Randomized approxima-
tion algorithms in combinatorial optimization.  In Dorit Hochbaum, editor,Approximation
Algorithms for NP-Hard Problems, chapter 11, pages 447–481. PWS Publishing Company,
1997.
[262]  Rajeev Motwani and Prabhakar Raghavan.Randomized Algorithms. Cambridge University
Press, 1995.
[263]  J. I. Munro and V. Raman. Fast stable in-place sorting withO.n/data moves.Algorithmica,
16(2):151–160, 1996.

Bibliography1245
[264]  J. Nievergelt and E. M. Reingold.  Binary search trees of bounded balance.SIAM Journal
on Computing, 2(1):33–43, 1973.
[265]  Ivan Niven and Herbert S. Zuckerman.An Introduction to the Theory of Numbers.  John
Wiley & Sons, fourth edition, 1980.
[266]  Alan  V.  Oppenheim  and  Ronald  W.  Schafer,  with  John  R.  Buck.Discrete-Time  Signal
Processing. Prentice Hall, second edition, 1998.
[267]  Alan V.  Oppenheim  and  Alan S.  Willsky,  with S. Hamid  Nawab.Signals  and  Systems.
Prentice Hall, second edition, 1997.
[268]  James B. Orlin.  A polynomial time primal network simplex algorithm for minimum cost
flows.Mathematical Programming, 78(1):109–129, 1997.
[269]  Joseph  O’Rourke.Computational  Geometry  in C.   Cambridge  University Press,  second
edition, 1998.
[270]  Christos H. Papadimitriou.Computational Complexity. Addison-Wesley, 1994.
[271]  Christos H. Papadimitriou and Kenneth Steiglitz.Combinatorial Optimization: Algorithms
and Complexity. Prentice Hall, 1982.
[272]  Michael S. Paterson. Progress in selection. InProceedings of the Fifth Scandinavian Work-
shop on Algorithm Theory, pages 368–379, 1996.
[273]  Mihai Pˇatras ̧cu and Mikkel Thorup.  Time-space trade-offs for predecessor search.  InPro-
ceedings  of  the 38th Annual  ACM Symposium  on Theory  of Computing,  pages  232–240,
2006.
[274]  Mihai Pˇatras ̧cu and Mikkel Thorup.  Randomization does not help searching predecessors.
InProceedings of the 18th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 555–564,
2007.
[275]  Pavel A. Pevzner.Computational Molecular Biology: An Algorithmic Approach.TheMIT
Press, 2000.
[276]  Steven Phillips and Jeffery Westbrook.  Online load balancing and network flow.  InPro-
ceedings  of  the 25th Annual  ACM Symposium  on Theory  of Computing,  pages  402–411,
1993.
[277]  J. M. Pollard. A Monte Carlo method for factorization.BIT, 15(3):331–334, 1975.
[278]  J. M. Pollard. Factoring with cubic integers. In A. K. Lenstra and H. W. Lenstra, Jr., editors,
The Development of the Number Field Sieve, volume 1554 ofLecture Notes in Mathematics,
pages 4–10. Springer, 1993.
[279]  Carl  Pomerance.    On  the  distribution  of  pseudoprimes.Mathematics  of  Computation,
37(156):587–593, 1981.
[280]  Carl Pomerance, editor.Proceedings of the AMS Symposia in Applied Mathematics: Com-
putational Number Theory and Cryptography.  American Mathematical Society, 1990.
[281]  William K. Pratt.Digital Image Processing. John Wiley & Sons, fourth edition, 2007.
[282]  Franco P. Preparata and Michael Ian Shamos.Computational Geometry:  An Introduction.
Springer, 1985.

1246Bibliography
[283]  William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery.Numer-
ical Recipes in C++: The Art of Scientific Computing. Cambridge University Press, second
edition, 2002.
[284]  William H. Press, Saul A. Teukolsky, William T. Vetterling, and Brian P. Flannery.Numer-
ical Recipes:  The Art of Scientific Computing.  Cambridge University Press, third edition,
2007.
[285]  R. C. Prim. Shortest connection networks and some generalizations.Bell System Technical
Journal, 36(6):1389–1401, 1957.
[286]  William Pugh.  Skip lists: A probabilistic alternative to balanced trees.Communications of
the ACM, 33(6):668–676, 1990.
[287]  Paul W. Purdom, Jr. and Cynthia A. Brown.The Analysis of Algorithms.  Holt, Rinehart,
and Winston, 1985.
[288]  Michael O. Rabin.  Probabilistic algorithms.  In J. F. Traub, editor,Algorithms and Com-
plexity: New Directions and Recent Results, pages 21–39. Academic Press, 1976.
[289]  Michael O. Rabin. Probabilistic algorithm for testing primality.Journal of Number Theory,
12(1):128–138, 1980.
[290]  P. Raghavan and C. D. Thompson.  Randomized rounding:  A technique for provably good
algorithms and algorithmic proofs.Combinatorica, 7(4):365–374, 1987.
[291]  Rajeev Raman.  Recent results on the single-source shortest paths problem.SIGACT News,
28(2):81–87, 1997.
[292]  James Reinders.Intel Threading Building Blocks: Outfitting C++ for Multi-core Processor
Parallelism. O’Reilly Media, Inc., 2007.
[293]  Edward M. Reingold, J  ̈urg Nievergelt, and Narsingh Deo.Combinatorial Algorithms: The-
ory and Practice. Prentice Hall, 1977.
[294]  Edward M. Reingold, Kenneth J. Urban, and David Gries. K-M-P string matching revisited.
Information Processing Letters, 64(5):217–223, 1997.
[295]  Hans  Riesel.Prime  Numbers  and  Computer  Methods  for  Factorization,  volume  126  of
Progress in Mathematics.Birkh ̈auser, second edition, 1994.
[296]  Ronald L. Rivest, Adi Shamir, and Leonard M. Adleman.  A method for obtaining digital
signatures  and  public-key  cryptosystems.Communications  of  the  ACM,  21(2):120–126,
1978.  See also U.S. Patent 4,405,829.
[297]  Herbert  Robbins.A  remark  on  Stirling’s  formula.American  Mathematical  Monthly,
62(1):26–29, 1955.
[298]  D. J. Rosenkrantz, R. E. Stearns, and P. M. Lewis.  An analysis of several heuristics for the
traveling salesman problem.SIAM Journal on Computing, 6(3):563–581, 1977.
[299]  Salvador  Roura.    An  improved  master  theorem  for  divide-and-conquer  recurrences.    In
Proceedings  of Automata,  Languages  and Programming,  24th International  Colloquium,
ICALP’97, volume 1256 ofLecture Notes in Computer Science, pages 449–459. Springer,
1997.
[300]  Y. A. Rozanov.Probability Theory: A Concise Course.  Dover, 1969.

Bibliography1247
[301]  S.  Sahni  and  T.  Gonzalez.    P-complete  approximation  problems.Journal  of  the  ACM,
23(3):555–565, 1976.
[302]  A. Sch  ̈onhage, M. Paterson, and N. Pippenger.  Finding the median.Journal of Computer
and System Sciences, 13(2):184–199, 1976.
[303]  Alexander  Schrijver.Theory  of  Linear  and  Integer  Programming.   John  Wiley & Sons,
1986.
[304]  Alexander Schrijver.  Paths and flows—A historical survey.CWI Quarterly, 6(3):169–183,
1993.
[305]  Robert  Sedgewick.Implementing  quicksort  programs.Communications  of  the  ACM,
21(10):847–857, 1978.
[306]  Robert Sedgewick.Algorithms. Addison-Wesley, second edition, 1988.
[307]  Robert  Sedgewick and Philippe  Flajolet.An Introduction  to the Analysis  of  Algorithms.
Addison-Wesley, 1996.
[308]  Raimund Seidel.  On the all-pairs-shortest-path problem in unweighted undirected graphs.
Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 51(3):400–403, 1995.
[309]  Raimund Seidel and C. R. Aragon.  Randomized search trees.Algorithmica, 16(4–5):464–
497, 1996.
[310]  Jo ̃ao Setubal and Jo ̃ao Meidanis.Introduction to Computational Molecular Biology.PWS
Publishing Company, 1997.
[311]  Clifford A. Shaffer.A Practical Introduction to Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis.
Prentice Hall, second edition, 2001.
[312]  Jeffrey Shallit.  Origins of the analysis of the Euclidean algorithm.Historia Mathematica,
21(4):401–419, 1994.
[313]  Michael I. Shamos and Dan Hoey.  Geometric intersection problems.  InProceedings of the
17th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 208–215, 1976.
[314]  M. Sharir. A strong-connectivity algorithm and its applications in data flow analysis.Com-
puters and Mathematics with Applications, 7(1):67–72, 1981.
[315]  David B. Shmoys.  Computing near-optimal solutions to combinatorial optimization prob-
lems.   In William Cook,  L ́aszl  ́oLov ́asz, and Paul Seymour,  editors,Combinatorial Opti-
mization, volume 20 ofDIMACS Series in Discrete Mathematics and Theoretical Computer
Science. American Mathematical Society, 1995.
[316]  Avi  Shoshan  and  Uri  Zwick.   All  pairs  shortest  paths  in  undirected  graphs  with  integer
weights.  InProceedings of the 40th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Sci-
ence, pages 605–614, 1999.
[317]  Michael Sipser.Introduction to the Theory of Computation.  Thomson Course Technology,
second edition, 2006.
[318]  Steven S. Skiena.The Algorithm Design Manual.  Springer, second edition, 1998.
[319]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan.   A data  structure for dynamic  trees.Journal  of
Computer and System Sciences, 26(3):362–391, 1983.

1248Bibliography
[320]  Daniel D. Sleator and Robert E. Tarjan.  Self-adjusting binary search trees.Journal of the
ACM, 32(3):652–686, 1985.
[321]  Joel Spencer.Ten Lectures on the Probabilistic Method, volume 64 ofCBMS-NSF Regional
Conference Series in Applied Mathematics.  Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics,
1993.
[322]  Daniel A. Spielman and Shang-Hua Teng.  Smoothed analysis of algorithms: Why the sim-
plex algorithm usually takes polynomial time.Journal of the ACM, 51(3):385–463, 2004.
[323]  Gilbert Strang.Introduction to Applied Mathematics.  Wellesley-Cambridge Press, 1986.
[324]  Gilbert Strang.Linear Algebra and Its Applications. Thomson Brooks/Cole, fourth edition,
2006.
[325]  Volker Strassen.  Gaussian elimination is not optimal.Numerische Mathematik, 14(3):354–
356, 1969.
[326]  T. G. Szymanski.  A special case of the maximal common subsequence problem.  Technical
Report TR-170, Computer Science Laboratory, Princeton University, 1975.
[327]  Robert E. Tarjan.  Depth first search and linear graph algorithms.SIAM Journal on Com-
puting, 1(2):146–160, 1972.
[328]  Robert E. Tarjan.  Efficiency of a good but not linear set union algorithm.Journal of the
ACM, 22(2):215–225, 1975.
[329]  Robert E. Tarjan.  A class of algorithms which require nonlinear time to maintain disjoint
sets.Journal of Computer and System Sciences, 18(2):110–127, 1979.
[330]  Robert  E.  Tarjan.Data  Structures  and  Network  Algorithms.   Society  for  Industrial  and
Applied Mathematics, 1983.
[331]  Robert E. Tarjan.  Amortized computational complexity.SIAM Journal on Algebraic and
Discrete Methods, 6(2):306–318, 1985.
[332]  Robert E. Tarjan. Class notes: Disjoint set union. COS 423, Princeton University, 1999.
[333]  Robert E. Tarjan and Jan van Leeuwen.  Worst-case analysis of set union algorithms.Jour-
nal of the ACM, 31(2):245–281, 1984.
[334]  George  B.  Thomas,  Jr.,  Maurice  D.  Weir,  Joel  Hass,  and  Frank  R.  Giordano.Thomas’
Calculus.  Addison-Wesley, eleventh edition, 2005.
[335]  Mikkel Thorup.   Faster deterministic sorting and priority queues in linear space.   InPro-
ceedings of the 9th ACM-SIAM Symposium on Discrete Algorithms, pages 550–555, 1998.
[336]  Mikkel  Thorup.   Undirected single-source  shortest paths with positive integer weights in
linear time.Journal of the ACM, 46(3):362–394, 1999.
[337]  Mikkel  Thorup.   On RAM priority queues.SIAM Journal on Computing,  30(1):86–109,
2000.
[338]  Richard Tolimieri, Myoung An, and Chao Lu.Mathematics of Multidimensional Fourier
Transform Algorithms. Springer, second edition, 1997.
[339]  P. van Emde Boas.  Preserving order in a forest in less than logarithmic time. InProceedings
of the 16th Annual Symposium on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 75–84, 1975.

Bibliography1249
[340]  P. van Emde  Boas.   Preserving order  in a forest in less than logarithmic time and linear
space.Information Processing Letters, 6(3):80–82, 1977.
[341]  P. van  Emde  Boas,  R. Kaas,  and  E. Zijlstra.   Design and  implementation of  an  efficient
priority queue.Mathematical Systems Theory, 10(1):99–127, 1976.
[342]  Jan van  Leeuwen,  editor.Handbook  of Theoretical  Computer  Science,  Volume A: Algo-
rithms and Complexity. Elsevier Science Publishers and the MIT Press, 1990.
[343]  Charles Van Loan.Computational Frameworks for the Fast Fourier Transform. Society for
Industrial and Applied Mathematics, 1992.
[344]  Robert J. Vanderbei.Linear Programming: Foundations and Extensions.  Kluwer Academic
Publishers, 1996.
[345]  Vijay V. Vazirani.Approximation Algorithms. Springer, 2001.
[346]  Rakesh M. Verma. General techniques for analyzing recursive algorithms with applications.
SIAM Journal on Computing, 26(2):568–581, 1997.
[347]  Hao  Wang  and  Bill Lin.   Pipelined  van  Emde  Boas  tree:  Algorithms,  analysis,  and  ap-
plications.   In26th IEEE International Conference  on Computer Communications,  pages
2471–2475, 2007.
[348]  Antony F. Ware.   Fast approximate Fourier transforms for irregularly spaced data.SIAM
Review, 40(4):838–856, 1998.
[349]  Stephen Warshall. A theorem on boolean matrices.Journal of the ACM, 9(1):11–12, 1962.
[350]  Michael  S.  Waterman.Introduction  to  Computational  Biology,  Maps,  Sequences  and
Genomes. Chapman & Hall, 1995.
[351]  Mark Allen Weiss.Data Structures and Problem Solving Using C++.   Addison-Wesley,
second edition, 2000.
[352]  Mark Allen Weiss.Data Structures  and Problem Solving Using Java.   Addison-Wesley,
third edition, 2006.
[353]  Mark Allen Weiss.Data Structures and Algorithm Analysis in C++. Addison-Wesley, third
edition, 2007.
[354]  Mark  Allen  Weiss.Data  Structures  and  Algorithm  Analysis  in  Java.   Addison-Wesley,
second edition, 2007.
[355]  Hassler Whitney.   On the abstract properties of linear dependence.American Journal of
Mathematics, 57(3):509–533, 1935.
[356]  Herbert S. Wilf.Algorithms and Complexity. A K Peters, second edition, 2002.
[357]  J. W. J. Williams.  Algorithm 232 (HEAPSORT).Communications of the ACM, 7(6):347–
348, 1964.
[358]  Shmuel Winograd. On the algebraic complexity of functions. InActes du Congr`es Interna-
tional des Math ́ematiciens, volume 3, pages 283–288, 1970.
[359]  Andrew C.-C. Yao. A lower bound to finding convex hulls.Journal of the ACM, 28(4):780–
787, 1981.
[360]  Chee Yap.  A real elementary approach to the master recurrence and generalizations.  Un-
published manuscript. Available at http://cs.nyu.edu/yap/papers/, July 2008.

1250Bibliography
[361]  Yinyu Ye.Interior Point Algorithms: Theory and Analysis. John Wiley & Sons, 1997.
[362]  Daniel Zwillinger, editor.CRC Standard Mathematical Tables and Formulae.  Chapman &
Hall/CRC Press, 31st edition, 2003.

Index
This index uses the following conventions. Numbers are alphabetized as if spelled
out; for example, “2-3-4 tree” is indexed as if it were “two-three-four tree.” When
an entry refers to a place other than the main text, the page number is followed by
a tag: ex. for exercise, pr. for problem, fig. for figure, and n. for footnote. A tagged
page number often indicates the first page of an exercise or problem, which is not
necessarily the page on which the reference actually appears.
 ̨.n/, 574
(golden ratio), 59, 108 pr.
y
(conjugate of the golden ratio), 59
.n/(Euler’s phi function), 943
.n/-approximation algorithm, 1106, 1123
o-notation, 50–51, 64
O-notation, 45 fig., 47–48, 64
O
0
-notation, 62 pr.
e
O-notation, 62 pr.
!-notation, 51
-notation, 45 fig., 48–49, 64
1
-notation, 62 pr.
e
-notation, 62 pr.
‚-notation, 44–47, 45 fig., 64
e
‚-notation, 62 pr.
fg
(set), 1158
2(set member), 1158
62(not a set member), 1158
;
(empty language), 1058
(empty set), 1158
(subset), 1159
(proper subset), 1159
W(such that), 1159
\(set intersection), 1159
[(set union), 1159
(set difference), 1159
jj
(flow value), 710
(length of a string), 986
(set cardinality), 1161
	
(Cartesian product), 1162
(cross product), 1016
hi
(sequence), 1166
(standard encoding), 1057

n
k

(choose), 1185
kk
(euclidean norm), 1222
Š(factorial), 57
de
(ceiling), 54
bc
(floor), 54
#
p
(lower square root), 546
"
p
(upper square root), 546
P
(sum), 1145
Q
(product), 1148
!(adjacency relation), 1169
(reachability relation), 1170
^(AND), 697, 1071
:(NOT), 1071
_(OR), 697, 1071
 ̊(group operator), 939
 ̋(convolution operator), 901

1252Index

(closure operator), 1058
j(divides relation), 927
−(does-not-divide relation), 927
(equivalent modulon), 54, 1165 ex.
6(not equivalent modulon), 54
Œa
n
(equivalence class modulon), 928
C
n
(addition modulon), 940

n
(multiplication modulon), 940
.
a
p
/(Legendre symbol), 982 pr.
"(empty string), 986, 1058
(prefix relation), 986
(suffix relation), 986
<
x
(above relation), 1022
//(comment symbol), 21
(much-greater-than relation), 574
(much-less-than relation), 783

P
(polynomial-time reducibility relation),
1067, 1077 ex.
AA-tree, 338
abelian group, 940
A
BOVE, 1024
above relation (<
x
), 1022
absent child, 1178
absolutely convergent series, 1146
absorption laws for sets, 1160
abstract problem, 1054
acceptable pair of integers, 972
acceptance
by an algorithm, 1058
by a finite automaton, 996
accepting state, 995
accounting method, 456–459
for binary counters, 458
for dynamic tables, 465–466
for stack operations, 457–458, 458 ex.
Ackermann’s function, 585
activity-selection problem, 415–422, 450
acyclic graph, 1170
relation to matroids, 448 pr.
add instruction, 23
addition
of binary integers, 22 ex.
of matrices, 1220
modulon(C
n
), 940
of polynomials, 898
additive group modulon, 940
addressing, open,seeopen-address hash table
A
DD-SUBARRAY, 805 pr.
adjacency-list representation, 590
replaced by a hash table, 593 ex.
adjacency-matrix representation, 591
adjacency relation (!), 1169
adjacent vertices, 1169
admissible edge, 749
admissible network, 749–750
adversary, 190
aggregate analysis, 452–456
for binary counters, 454–455
for breadth-first search, 597
for depth-first search, 606
for Dijkstra’s algorithm, 661
for disjoint-set data structures, 566–567,
568 ex.
for dynamic tables, 465
for Fibonacci heaps, 518, 522 ex.
for Graham’s scan, 1036
for the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 1006
for Prim’s algorithm, 636
for rod-cutting, 367
for shortest paths in a dag, 655
for stack operations, 452–454
aggregate flow, 863
Akra-Bazzi method for solving a recurrence,
112–113
algorithm, 5
correctness of, 6
origin of word, 42
running time of, 25
as a technology, 13
Alice, 959
A
LLOCATE-NODE, 492
A
LLOCATE-OBJECT, 244
allocation of objects, 243–244
all-pairs shortest paths, 644, 684–707
in dynamic graphs, 707
in-dense graphs, 706 pr.
Floyd-Warshall algorithm for, 693–697, 706
Johnson’s algorithm for, 700–706
by matrix multiplication, 686–693, 706–707
by repeated squaring, 689–691
alphabet, 995, 1057
 ̨.n/, 574
amortized analysis, 451–478
accounting method of, 456–459
aggregate analysis, 367, 452–456

Index1253
for bit-reversal permutation, 472 pr.
for breadth-first search, 597
for depth-first search, 606
for Dijkstra’s algorithm, 661
for disjoint-set data structures, 566–567,
568 ex., 572 ex., 575–581, 581–582 ex.
for dynamic tables, 463–471
for Fibonacci heaps, 509–512, 517–518,
520–522, 522 ex.
for the generic push-relabel algorithm, 746
for Graham’s scan, 1036
for the Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 1006
for making binary search dynamic, 473 pr.
potential method of, 459–463
for restructuring red-black trees, 474 pr.
for self-organizing lists with move-to-front,
476 pr.
for shortest paths in a dag, 655
for stacks on secondary storage, 502 pr.
for weight-balanced trees, 473 pr.
amortized cost
in the accounting method, 456
in aggregate analysis, 452
in the potential method, 459
ancestor, 1176
least common, 584 pr.
AND function (^), 697, 1071
AND gate, 1070
and, in pseudocode, 22
antiparallel edges, 711–712
antisymmetric relation, 1164
A
NY-SEGMENTS-INTERSECT, 1025
approximation
by least squares, 835–839
of summation by integrals, 1154–1156
approximation algorithm, 10, 1105–1140
for bin packing, 1134 pr.
for MAX-CNF satisfiability, 1127 ex.
for maximum clique, 1111 ex., 1134 pr.
for maximum matching, 1135 pr.
for maximum spanning tree, 1137 pr.
for maximum-weight cut, 1127 ex.
for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1123–1124,
1139
for minimum-weight vertex cover,
1124–1127, 1139
for parallel machine scheduling, 1136 pr.
randomized, 1123
for set cover, 1117–1122, 1139
for subset sum, 1128–1134, 1139
for traveling-salesman problem, 1111–1117,
1139
for vertex cover, 1108–1111, 1139
for weighted set cover, 1135 pr.
for 0-1 knapsack problem, 1137 pr., 1139
approximation error, 836
approximation ratio, 1106, 1123
approximation scheme, 1107
A
PPROX-MIN-WEIGHT-VC, 1126
A
PPROX-SUBSET-SUM, 1131
A
PPROX-TSP-TOUR, 1112
A
PPROX-VERTEX-COVER, 1109
arbitrage, 679 pr.
arc,seeedge
argument of a function, 1166–1167
arithmetic instructions, 23
arithmetic, modular, 54, 939–946
arithmetic series, 1146
arithmetic with infinities, 650
arm, 485
array, 21
Monge, 110 pr.
passing as a parameter, 21
articulation point, 621 pr.
assignment
multiple, 21
satisfying, 1072, 1079
truth, 1072, 1079
associative laws for sets, 1160
associative operation, 939
asymptotically larger, 52
asymptotically nonnegative, 45
asymptotically positive, 45
asymptotically smaller, 52
asymptotically tight bound, 45
asymptotic efficiency, 43
asymptotic lower bound, 48
asymptotic notation, 43–53, 62 pr.
and graph algorithms, 588
and linearity of summations, 1146
asymptotic upper bound, 47
attribute of an object, 21
augmentation of a flow, 716
augmenting data structures, 339–355
augmenting path, 719–720, 763 pr.
authentication, 284 pr., 960–961, 964

1254Index
automaton
finite, 995
string-matching, 996–1002
auxiliary hash function, 272
auxiliary linear program, 886
average-case running time, 28, 116
AV L - I
NSERT, 333 pr.
AVL tree, 333 pr., 337
axioms, for probability, 1190
babyface, 602 ex.
back edge, 609, 613
back substitution, 817
B
AD-SET-COVER-INSTANCE, 1122 ex.
B
ALANCE, 333 pr.
balanced search tree
AA-trees, 338
AVL trees, 333 pr., 337
B-trees, 484–504
k-neighbor trees, 338
red-black trees, 308–338
scapegoat trees, 338
splay trees, 338, 482
treaps, 333 pr., 338
2-3-4 trees, 489, 503 pr.
2-3 trees, 337, 504
weight-balanced trees, 338, 473 pr.
balls and bins, 133–134, 1215 pr.
base-apseudoprime, 967
base case, 65, 84
base, in DNA, 391
basic feasible solution, 866
basic solution, 866
basic variable, 855
basis function, 835
Bayes’s theorem, 1194
B
ELLMAN-FORD, 651
Bellman-Ford algorithm, 651–655, 682
for all-pairs shortest paths, 684
in Johnson’s algorithm, 702–704
and objective functions, 670 ex.
to solve systems of difference constraints,
668
Yen’s improvement to, 678 pr.
B
ELOW, 1024
Bernoulli trial, 1201
and balls and bins, 133–134
and streaks, 135–139
best-case running time, 29 ex., 49
BFS, 595
B
IASED-RANDOM, 117 ex.
biconnected component, 621 pr.
big-oh notation, 45 fig., 47–48, 64
big-omega notation, 45 fig., 48–49, 64
bijective function, 1167
binary character code, 428
binary counter
analyzed by accounting method, 458
analyzed by aggregate analysis, 454–455
analyzed by potential method, 461–462
bit-reversed, 472 pr.
binary entropy function, 1187
binary gcd algorithm, 981 pr.
binary heap,seeheap
binary relation, 1163
binary search, 39 ex.
with fast insertion, 473 pr.
in insertion sort, 39 ex.
in multithreaded merging, 799–800
in searching B-trees, 499 ex.
B
INARY-SEARCH, 799
binary search tree, 286–307
AA-trees, 338
AVL trees, 333 pr., 337
deletion from, 295–298, 299 ex.
with equal keys, 303 pr.
insertion into, 294–295
k-neighbor trees, 338
maximum key of, 291
minimum key of, 291
optimal, 397–404, 413
predecessor in, 291–292
querying, 289–294
randomly built, 299–303, 304 pr.
right-converting of, 314 ex.
scapegoat trees, 338
searching, 289–291
for sorting, 299 ex.
splay trees, 338
successor in, 291–292
and treaps, 333 pr.
weight-balanced trees, 338
see alsored-black tree
binary-search-tree property, 287
in treaps, 333 pr.
vs. min-heap property, 289 ex.

Index1255
binary tree, 1177
full, 1178
number of different ones, 306 pr.
representation of, 246
superimposed upon a bit vector, 533–534
see alsobinary search tree
binomial coefficient, 1186–1187
binomial distribution, 1203–1206
and balls and bins, 133
maximum value of, 1207 ex.
tails of, 1208–1215
binomial expansion, 1186
binomial heap, 527 pr.
binomial tree, 527 pr.
bin packing, 1134 pr.
bipartite graph, 1172
corresponding flow network of, 732
d-regular, 736 ex.
and hypergraphs, 1173 ex.
bipartite matching, 530, 732–736, 747 ex., 766
Hopcroft-Karp algorithm for, 763 pr.
birthday paradox, 130–133, 142 ex.
bisection of a tree, 1181 pr.
bitonic euclidean traveling-salesman problem,
405 pr.
bitonic sequence, 682 pr.
bitonic tour, 405 pr.
bit operation, 927
in Euclid’s algorithm, 981 pr.
bit-reversal permutation, 472 pr., 918
B
IT-REVERSE-COPY, 918
bit-reversed binary counter, 472 pr.
B
IT-REVERSED-INCREMENT, 472 pr.
bit vector, 255 ex., 532–536
black-height, 309
black vertex, 594, 603
blocking flow, 765
block structure in pseudocode, 20
Bob, 959
Boole’s inequality, 1195 ex.
boolean combinational circuit, 1071
boolean combinational element, 1070
boolean connective, 1079
boolean formula, 1049, 1066 ex., 1079,
1086 ex.
boolean function, 1187 ex.
boolean matrix multiplication, 832 ex.
Bor  ̇uvka’s algorithm, 641
bottleneck spanning tree, 640 pr.
bottleneck traveling-salesman problem,
1117 ex.
bottom of a stack, 233
B
OTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD, 366
bottom-up method, for dynamic programming,
365
bound
asymptotically tight, 45
asymptotic lower, 48
asymptotic upper, 47
on binomial coefficients, 1186–1187
on binomial distributions, 1206
polylogarithmic, 57
on the tails of a binomial distribution,
1208–1215
see alsolower bounds
boundary condition, in a recurrence, 67, 84
boundary of a polygon, 1020 ex.
bounding a summation, 1149–1156
box, nesting, 678 pr.
B
C
-tree, 488
branching factor, in B-trees, 487
branch instructions, 23
breadth-first search, 594–602, 623
in maximum flow, 727–730, 766
and shortest paths, 597–600, 644
similarity to Dijkstra’s algorithm, 662,
663 ex.
breadth-first tree, 594, 600
bridge, 621 pr.
B

-tree, 489 n.
B-tree, 484–504
compared with red-black trees, 484, 490
creating, 492
deletion from, 499–502
full node in, 489
height of, 489–490
insertion into, 493–497
minimum degree of, 489
minimum key of, 497 ex.
properties of, 488–491
searching, 491–492
splitting a node in, 493–495
2-3-4 trees, 489
B-T
REE-CREATE, 492
B-T
REE-DELETE, 499
B-T
REE-INSERT, 495

1256Index
B-T
REE-INSERT-NONFULL, 496
B-T
REE-SEARCH, 492, 499 ex.
B-T
REE-SPLIT-CHILD, 494
B
UBBLESORT,40pr.
bucket, 200
bucket sort, 200–204
B
UCKET-SORT, 201
B
UILD-MAX-HEAP, 157
B
UILD-MAX-HEAP
0
, 167 pr.
B
UILD-MIN-HEAP, 159
butterfly operation, 915
by, in pseudocode, 21
cache, 24, 449 pr.
cache hit, 449 pr.
cache miss, 449 pr.
cache obliviousness, 504
caching, off-line, 449 pr.
call
in a multithreaded computation, 776
of a subroutine, 23, 25 n.
by value, 21
call edge, 778
cancellation lemma, 907
cancellation of flow, 717
canonical form for task scheduling, 444
capacity
of a cut, 721
of an edge, 709
residual, 716, 719
of a vertex, 714 ex.
capacity constraint, 709–710
cardinality of a set (
jj
), 1161
Carmichael number, 968, 975 ex.
Cartesian product (	), 1162
Cartesian sum, 906 ex.
cascading cut, 520
C
ASCADING-CUT, 519
Catalan numbers, 306 pr., 372
ceiling function (
de
), 54
in master theorem, 103–106
ceiling instruction, 23
certain event, 1190
certificate
in a cryptosystem, 964
for verification algorithms, 1063
C
HAINED-HASH-DELETE, 258
C
HAINED-HASH-INSERT, 258
C
HAINED-HASH-SEARCH, 258
chaining, 257–260, 283 pr.
chain of a convex hull, 1038
changing a key, in a Fibonacci heap, 529 pr.
changing variables, in the substitution method,
86–87
character code, 428
chess-playing program, 790–791
child
in a binary tree, 1178
in a multithreaded computation, 776
in a rooted tree, 1176
child list in a Fibonacci heap, 507
Chinese remainder theorem, 950–954, 983
chip multiprocessor, 772
chirp transform, 914 ex.
choose

n
k

, 1185
chord, 345 ex.
Cilk, 774, 812
Cilk++, 774, 812
ciphertext, 960
circuit
boolean combinational, 1071
depth of, 919
for fast Fourier transform, 919–920
CIRCUIT-SAT, 1072
circuit satisfiability, 1070–1077
circular, doubly linked list with a sentinel, 239
circular linked list, 236
see alsolinked list
class
complexity, 1059
equivalence, 1164
classification of edges
in breadth-first search, 621 pr.
in depth-first search, 609–610, 611 ex.
in a multithreaded dag, 778–779
clause, 1081–1082
clean area, 208 pr.
clique, 1086–1089, 1105
approximation algorithm for, 1111 ex.,
1134 pr.
CLIQUE, 1087
closed interval, 348
closed semiring, 707
closest pair, finding, 1039–1044, 1047
closest-point heuristic, 1117 ex.

Index1257
closure
group property, 939
of a language, 1058
operator (

), 1058
transitive,seetransitive closure
cluster
in a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 534
for parallel computing, 772
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 538
in van Emde Boas trees, 546
clustering, 272
CNF (conjunctive normal form), 1049, 1082
CNF satisfiability, 1127 ex.
coarsening leaves of recursion
in merge sort, 39 pr.
when recursively spawning, 787
code, 428–429
Huffman, 428–437, 450
codeword, 429
codomain, 1166
coefficient
binomial, 1186
of a polynomial, 55, 898
in slack form, 856
coefficient representation, 900
and fast multiplication, 903–905
cofactor, 1224
coin changing, 446 pr.
colinearity, 1016
collision, 257
resolution by chaining, 257–260
resolution by open addressing, 269–277
collision-resistant hash function, 964
coloring, 1103 pr., 1180 pr.
color, of a red-black-tree node, 308
column-major order, 208 pr.
column rank, 1223
columnsort, 208 pr.
column vector, 1218
combination, 1185
combinational circuit, 1071
combinational element, 1070
combine step, in divide-and-conquer, 30, 65
comment, in pseudocode (//), 21
commodity, 862
common divisor, 929
greatest,seegreatest common divisor
common multiple, 939 ex.
common subexpression, 915
common subsequence, 7, 391
longest, 7, 390–397, 413
commutative laws for sets, 1159
commutative operation, 940
C
OMPACTIFY-LIST, 245 ex.
compact list, 250 pr.
C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH, 250 pr.
C
OMPACT-LIST-SEARCH
0
, 251 pr.
comparable line segments, 1022
C
OMPARE-EXCHANGE, 208 pr.
compare-exchange operation, 208 pr.
comparison sort, 191
and binary search trees, 289 ex.
randomized, 205 pr.
and selection, 222
compatible activities, 415
compatible matrices, 371, 1221
competitive analysis, 476 pr.
complement
of an event, 1190
of a graph, 1090
of a language, 1058
Schur, 820, 834
of a set, 1160
complementary slackness, 894 pr.
complete graph, 1172
completek-ary tree, 1179
see alsoheap
completeness of a language, 1077 ex.
complete step, 782
completion time, 447 pr., 1136 pr.
complexity class, 1059
co-NP, 1064
NP, 1049, 1064
NPC, 1050, 1069
P, 1049, 1055
complexity measure, 1059
complex numbers
inverting matrices of, 832 ex.
multiplication of, 83 ex.
complex root of unity, 906
interpolation at, 912–913
component
biconnected, 621 pr.
connected, 1170
strongly connected, 1170

1258Index
component graph, 617
composite number, 928
witness to, 968
composition, of multithreaded computations,
784 fig.
computational depth, 812
computational geometry, 1014–1047
computational problem, 5–6
computation dag, 777
computation, multithreaded, 777
C
OMPUTE-PREFIX-FUNCTION, 1006
C
OMPUTE-TRANSITION-FUNCTION, 1001
concatenation
of languages, 1058
of strings, 986
concrete problem, 1055
concurrency keywords, 774, 776, 785
concurrency platform, 773
conditional branch instruction, 23
conditional independence, 1195 ex.
conditional probability, 1192, 1194
configuration, 1074
conjugate of the golden ratio (
y
), 59
conjugate transpose, 832 ex.
conjunctive normal form, 1049, 1082
connected component, 1170
identified using depth-first search, 612 ex.
identified using disjoint-set data structures,
562–564
C
ONNECTED-COMPONENTS, 563
connected graph, 1170
connective, 1079
co-NP (complexity class), 1064
conquer step, in divide-and-conquer, 30, 65
conservation of flow, 709–710
consistency
of literals, 1088
sequential, 779, 812
C
ONSOLIDATE, 516
consolidating a Fibonacci-heap root list,
513–517
constraint, 851
difference, 665
equality, 670 ex., 852–853
inequality, 852–853
linear, 846
nonnegativity, 851, 853
tight, 865
violation of, 865
constraint graph, 666–668
contain, in a path, 1170
continuation edge, 778
continuous uniform probability distribution,
1192
contraction
of a dynamic table, 467–471
of a matroid, 442
of an undirected graph by an edge, 1172
control instructions, 23
convergence property, 650, 672–673
convergent series, 1146
converting binary to decimal, 933 ex.
convex combination of points, 1015
convex function, 1199
convex hull, 8, 1029–1039, 1046 pr.
convex layers, 1044 pr.
convex polygon, 1020 ex.
convex set, 714 ex.
convolution ( ̋), 901
convolution theorem, 913
copy instruction, 23
correctness of an algorithm, 6
corresponding flow network for bipartite
matching, 732
countably infinite set, 1161
counter,seebinary counter
counting, 1183–1189
probabilistic, 143 pr.
counting sort, 194–197
in radix sort, 198
C
OUNTING-SORT, 195
coupon collector’s problem, 134
cover
path, 761 pr.
by a subset, 1118
vertex, 1089, 1108, 1124–1127, 1139
covertical, 1024
C
REATE-NEW-RS-VEB-TREE, 557 pr.
credit, 456
critical edge, 729
critical path
of a dag, 657
of a multithreaded computation, 779
cross a cut, 626
cross edge, 609
cross product (	), 1016

Index1259
cryptosystem, 958–965, 983
cubic spline, 840 pr.
currency exchange, 390 ex., 679 pr.
curve fitting, 835–839
cut
capacity of, 721
cascading, 520
of a flow network, 720–724
minimum, 721, 731 ex.
net flow across, 720
of an undirected graph, 626
weight of, 1127 ex.
C
UT, 519
C
UT-ROD, 363
cutting, in a Fibonacci heap, 519
cycle of a graph, 1170
hamiltonian, 1049, 1061
minimum mean-weight, 680 pr.
negative-weight,seenegative-weight cycle
and shortest paths, 646–647
cyclic group, 955
cyclic rotation, 1012 ex.
cycling, of simplex algorithm, 875
dag,seedirected acyclic graph
D
AG-SHORTEST-PAT H S, 655
d-ary heap, 167 pr.
in shortest-paths algorithms, 706 pr.
data-movement instructions, 23
data-parallel model, 811
data structure, 9, 229–355, 481–585
AA-trees, 338
augmentation of, 339–355
AVL trees, 333 pr., 337
binary search trees, 286–307
binomial heaps, 527 pr.
bit vectors, 255 ex., 532–536
B-trees, 484–504
deques, 236 ex.
dictionaries, 229
direct-address tables, 254–255
for disjoint sets, 561–585
for dynamic graphs, 483
dynamic sets, 229–231
dynamic trees, 482
exponential search trees, 212, 483
Fibonacci heaps, 505–530
fusion trees, 212, 483
hash tables, 256–261
heaps, 151–169
interval trees, 348–354
k-neighbor trees, 338
linked lists, 236–241
mergeable heap, 505
order-statistic trees, 339–345
persistent, 331 pr., 482
potential of, 459
priority queues, 162–166
proto van Emde Boas structures, 538–545
queues, 232, 234–235
radix trees, 304 pr.
red-black trees, 308–338
relaxed heaps, 530
rooted trees, 246–249
scapegoat trees, 338
on secondary storage, 484–487
skip lists, 338
splay trees, 338, 482
stacks, 232–233
treaps, 333 pr., 338
2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
2-3-4 trees, 489, 503 pr.
2-3 trees, 337, 504
van Emde Boas trees, 531–560
weight-balanced trees, 338
data type, 23
deadline, 444
deallocation of objects, 243–244
decision by an algorithm, 1058–1059
decision problem, 1051, 1054
and optimization problems, 1051
decision tree, 192–193
D
ECREASE-KEY, 162, 505
decreasing a key
in Fibonacci heaps, 519–522
in 2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
D
ECREMENT, 456 ex.
degeneracy, 874
degree
of a binomial-tree root, 527 pr.
maximum, of a Fibonacci heap, 509,
523–526
minimum, of a B-tree, 489
of a node, 1177
of a polynomial, 55, 898
of a vertex, 1169

1260Index
degree-bound, 898
D
ELETE, 230, 505
D
ELETE-LARGER-HALF, 463 ex.
deletion
from binary search trees, 295–298, 299 ex.
from a bit vector with a superimposed binary
tree, 534
from a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 535
from B-trees, 499–502
from chained hash tables, 258
from direct-address tables, 254
from dynamic tables, 467–471
from Fibonacci heaps, 522, 526 pr.
from heaps, 166 ex.
from interval trees, 349
from linked lists, 238
from open-address hash tables, 271
from order-statistic trees, 343–344
from proto van Emde Boas structures, 544
from queues, 234
from red-black trees, 323–330
from stacks, 232
from sweep-line statuses, 1024
from 2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
from van Emde Boas trees, 554–556
DeMorgan’s laws
for propositional logic, 1083
for sets, 1160, 1162 ex.
dense graph, 589
-dense, 706 pr.
density
of prime numbers, 965–966
of a rod, 370 ex.
dependence
and indicator random variables, 119
linear, 1223
see alsoindependence
depth
average, of a node in a randomly built binary
search tree, 304 pr.
of a circuit, 919
of a node in a rooted tree, 1177
of quicksort recursion tree, 178 ex.
of a stack, 188 pr.
depth-determination problem, 583 pr.
depth-first forest, 603
depth-first search, 603–612, 623
in finding articulation points, bridges, and
biconnected components, 621 pr.
in finding strongly connected components,
615–621, 623
in topological sorting, 612–615
depth-first tree, 603
deque, 236 ex.
D
EQUEUE, 235
derivative of a series, 1147
descendant, 1176
destination vertex, 644
det,seedeterminant
determinacy race, 788
determinant, 1224–1225
and matrix multiplication, 832 ex.
deterministic algorithm, 123
multithreaded, 787
D
ETERMINISTIC-SEARCH, 143 pr.
DFS, 604
DFS-V
ISIT, 604
DFT (discrete Fourier transform), 9, 909
diagonal matrix, 1218
LUP decomposition of, 827 ex.
diameter of a tree, 602 ex.
dictionary, 229
difference constraints, 664–670
difference equation,seerecurrence
difference of sets (), 1159
symmetric, 763 pr.
differentiation of a series, 1147
digital signature, 960
digraph,seedirected graph
D
IJKSTRA, 658
Dijkstra’s algorithm, 658–664, 682
for all-pairs shortest paths, 684, 704
implemented with a Fibonacci heap, 662
implemented with a min-heap, 662
with integer edge weights, 664 ex.
in Johnson’s algorithm, 702
similarity to breadth-first search, 662,
663 ex.
similarity to Prim’s algorithm, 634, 662
D
IRECT-ADDRESS-DELETE, 254
direct addressing, 254–255, 532–536
D
IRECT-ADDRESS-INSERT, 254
D
IRECT-ADDRESS-SEARCH, 254
direct-address table, 254–255
directed acyclic graph (dag), 1172

Index1261
and back edges, 613
and component graphs, 617
and hamiltonian paths, 1066 ex.
longest simple path in, 404 pr.
for representing a multithreaded
computation, 777
single-source shortest-paths algorithm for,
655–658
topological sort of, 612–615, 623
directed graph, 1168
all-pairs shortest paths in, 684–707
constraint graph, 666
Euler tour of, 623 pr., 1048
hamiltonian cycle of, 1049
and longest paths, 1048
path cover of, 761 pr.
PERT chart, 657, 657 ex.
semiconnected, 621 ex.
shortest path in, 643
single-source shortest paths in, 643–683
singly connected, 612 ex.
square of, 593 ex.
transitive closure of, 697
transpose of, 592 ex.
universal sink in, 593 ex.
see alsodirected acyclic graph, graph,
network
directed segment, 1015–1017
directed version of an undirected graph, 1172
D
IRECTION, 1018
dirty area, 208 pr.
D
ISCHARGE, 751
discharge of an overflowing vertex, 751
discovered vertex, 594, 603
discovery time, in depth-first search, 605
discrete Fourier transform, 9, 909
discrete logarithm, 955
discrete logarithm theorem, 955
discrete probability distribution, 1191
discrete random variable, 1196–1201
disjoint-set data structure, 561–585
analysis of, 575–581, 581 ex.
in connected components, 562–564
in depth determination, 583 pr.
disjoint-set-forest implementation of,
568–572
in Kruskal’s algorithm, 631
linear-time special case of, 585
linked-list implementation of, 564–568
in off-line least common ancestors, 584 pr.
in off-line minimum, 582 pr.
in task scheduling, 448 pr.
disjoint-set forest, 568–572
analysis of, 575–581, 581 ex.
rank properties of, 575, 581 ex.
see alsodisjoint-set data structure
disjoint sets, 1161
disjunctive normal form, 1083
disk, 1028 ex.
disk drive, 485–487
see alsosecondary storage
D
ISK-READ, 487
D
ISK-WRITE, 487
distance
edit, 406 pr.
euclidean, 1039
L
m
, 1044 ex.
Manhattan, 225 pr., 1044 ex.
of a shortest path, 597
distributed memory, 772
distribution
binomial, 1203–1206
continuous uniform, 1192
discrete, 1191
geometric, 1202–1203
of inputs, 116, 122
of prime numbers, 965
probability, 1190
sparse-hulled, 1046 pr.
uniform, 1191
distributive laws for sets, 1160
divergent series, 1146
divide-and-conquer method, 30–35, 65
analysis of, 34–35
for binary search, 39 ex.
for conversion of binary to decimal, 933 ex.
for fast Fourier transform, 909–912
for finding the closest pair of points,
1040–1043
for finding the convex hull, 1030
for matrix inversion, 829–831
for matrix multiplication, 76–83, 792–797
for maximum-subarray problem, 68–75
for merge sort, 30–37, 797–805
for multiplication, 920 pr.

1262Index
for multithreaded matrix multiplication,
792–797
for multithreaded merge sort, 797–805
for quicksort, 170–190
relation to dynamic programming, 359
for selection, 215–224
solving recurrences for, 83–106, 112–113
for Strassen’s algorithm, 79–83
divide instruction, 23
divides relation (j), 927
divide step, in divide-and-conquer, 30, 65
division method, 263, 268–269 ex.
division theorem, 928
divisor, 927–928
common, 929
see alsogreatest common divisor
DNA, 6–7, 390–391, 406 pr.
DNF (disjunctive normal form), 1083
does-not-divide relation (−), 927
domain, 1166
dominates relation, 1045 pr.
double hashing, 272–274, 277 ex.
doubly linked list, 236
see alsolinked list
downto, in pseudocode, 21
d-regular graph, 736 ex.
duality, 879–886, 895 pr.
weak, 880–881, 886 ex.
dual linear program, 879
dummy key, 397
dynamic graph, 562 n.
all-pairs shortest paths algorithms for, 707
data structures for, 483
minimum-spanning-tree algorithm for,
637 ex.
transitive closure of, 705 pr., 707
dynamic multithreaded algorithm,see
multithreaded algorithm
dynamic multithreading, 773
dynamic order statistics, 339–345
dynamic-programming method, 359–413
for activity selection, 421 ex.
for all-pairs shortest paths, 686–697
for bitonic euclidean traveling-salesman
problem, 405 pr.
bottom-up, 365
for breaking a string, 410 pr.
compared with greedy algorithms, 381,
390 ex., 418, 423–427
for edit distance, 406 pr.
elements of, 378–390
for Floyd-Warshall algorithm, 693–697
for inventory planning, 411 pr.
for longest common subsequence, 390–397
for longest palindrome subsequence, 405 pr.
for longest simple path in a weighted
directed acyclic graph, 404 pr.
for matrix-chain multiplication, 370–378
and memoization, 387–389
for optimal binary search trees, 397–404
optimal substructure in, 379–384
overlapping subproblems in, 384–386
for printing neatly, 405 pr.
reconstructing an optimal solution in, 387
relation to divide-and-conquer, 359
for rod-cutting, 360–370
for seam carving, 409 pr.
for signing free agents, 411 pr.
top-down with memoization, 365
for transitive closure, 697–699
for Viterbi algorithm, 408 pr.
for 0-1 knapsack problem, 427 ex.
dynamic set, 229–231
see alsodata structure
dynamic table, 463–471
analyzed by accounting method, 465–466
analyzed by aggregate analysis, 465
analyzed by potential method, 466–471
load factor of, 463
dynamic tree, 482
e,55
EŒ(expected value), 1197
early-first form, 444
early task, 444
edge, 1168
admissible, 749
antiparallel, 711–712
attributes of, 592
back, 609
bridge, 621 pr.
call, 778
capacity of, 709
classification in breadth-first search, 621 pr.
classification in depth-first search, 609–610

Index1263
continuation, 778
critical, 729
cross, 609
forward, 609
inadmissible, 749
light, 626
negative-weight, 645–646
residual, 716
return, 779
safe, 626
saturated, 739
spawn, 778
tree, 601, 603, 609
weight of, 591
edge connectivity, 731 ex.
edge set, 1168
edit distance, 406 pr.
Edmonds-Karp algorithm, 727–730
elementary event, 1189
elementary insertion, 465
element of a set (2), 1158
ellipsoid algorithm, 850, 897
elliptic-curve factorization method, 984
elseif, in pseudocode, 20 n.
else, in pseudocode, 20
empty language (;), 1058
empty set (;), 1158
empty set laws, 1159
empty stack, 233
emptystring("), 986, 1058
empty tree, 1178
encoding of problem instances, 1055–1057
endpoint
of an interval, 348
of a line segment, 1015
E
NQUEUE, 235
entering a vertex, 1169
entering variable, 867
entropy function, 1187
-dense graph, 706 pr.
-universal hash function, 269 ex.
equality
of functions, 1166
linear, 845
of sets, 1158
equality constraint, 670 ex., 852
and inequality constraints, 853
tight, 865
violation of, 865
equation
and asymptotic notation, 49–50
normal, 837
recurrence,seerecurrence
equivalence class, 1164
modulon(Œa
n
), 928
equivalence, modular (), 54, 1165 ex.
equivalence relation, 1164
and modular equivalence, 1165 ex.
equivalent linear programs, 852
error, in pseudocode, 22
escape problem, 760 pr.
E
UCLID, 935
Euclid’s algorithm, 933–939, 981 pr., 983
euclidean distance, 1039
euclidean norm (
kk
), 1222
Euler’s constant, 943
Euler’s phi function, 943
Euler’s theorem, 954, 975 ex.
Euler tour, 623 pr., 1048
and hamiltonian cycles, 1048
evaluation of a polynomial, 41 pr., 900, 905 ex.
derivatives of, 922 pr.
at multiple points, 923 pr.
event, 1190
event point, 1023
event-point schedule, 1023
E
XACT-SUBSET-SUM, 1129
excess flow, 736
exchange property, 437
exclusion and inclusion, 1163 ex.
execute a subroutine, 25 n.
expansion of a dynamic table, 464–467
expectation,seeexpected value
expected running time, 28, 117
expected value, 1197–1199
of a binomial distribution, 1204
of a geometric distribution, 1202
of an indicator random variable, 118
explored vertex, 605
exponential function, 55–56
exponential height, 300
exponential search tree, 212, 483
exponential series, 1147
exponentiation instruction, 24
exponentiation, modular, 956
E
XTENDED-BOTTOM-UP-CUT-ROD, 369

1264Index
E
XTENDED-EUCLID, 937
E
XTEND-SHORTEST-PAT H S, 688
extension of a set, 438
exterior of a polygon, 1020 ex.
external node, 1176
external path length, 1180 ex.
extracting the maximum key
fromd-ary heaps, 167 pr.
from max-heaps, 163
extracting the minimum key
from Fibonacci heaps, 512–518
from 2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
from Young tableaus, 167 pr.
E
XTRACT-MAX, 162–163
E
XTRACT-MIN, 162, 505
factor, 928
twiddle, 912
factorial function (Š), 57–58
factorization, 975–980, 984
unique, 931
failure, in a Bernoulli trial, 1201
fair coin, 1191
fan-out, 1071
Farkas’s lemma, 895 pr.
farthest-pair problem, 1030
F
ASTER-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H S, 691,
692 ex.
fast Fourier transform (FFT), 898–925
circuit for, 919–920
iterative implementation of, 915–918
multidimensional, 921 pr.
multithreaded algorithm for, 804 ex.
recursive implementation of, 909–912
using modular arithmetic, 923 pr.
feasibility problem, 665, 894 pr.
feasible linear program, 851
feasible region, 847
feasible solution, 665, 846, 851
Fermat’s theorem, 954
FFT,seefast Fourier transform
FFTW, 924
F
IB, 775
F
IB-HEAP-CHANGE-KEY, 529 pr.
F
IB-HEAP-DECREASE-KEY, 519
F
IB-HEAP-DELETE, 522
F
IB-HEAP-EXTRACT-MIN, 513
F
IB-HEAP-INSERT, 510
F
IB-HEAP-LINK, 516
F
IB-HEAP-PRUNE, 529 pr.
F
IB-HEAP-UNION, 512
Fibonacci heap, 505–530
changing a key in, 529 pr.
compared with binary heaps, 506–507
creating, 510
decreasing a key in, 519–522
deletion from, 522, 526 pr.
in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 662
extracting the minimum key from, 512–518
insertion into, 510–511
in Johnson’s algorithm, 704
maximum degree of, 509, 523–526
minimum key of, 511
potential function for, 509
in Prim’s algorithm, 636
pruning, 529 pr.
running times of operations on, 506 fig.
uniting, 511–512
Fibonacci numbers, 59–60, 108 pr., 523
computation of, 774–780, 981 pr.
FIFO (first-in, first-out), 232
see alsoqueue
final-state function, 996
final strand, 779
F
IND-DEPTH, 583 pr.
F
IND-MAX-CROSSING-SUBARRAY,71
F
IND-MAXIMUM-SUBARRAY,72
find path, 569
F
IND-SET, 562
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 571,
585
linked-list implementation of, 564
finished vertex, 603
finishing time, in depth-first search, 605
and strongly connected components, 618
finish time, in activity selection, 415
finite automaton, 995
for string matching, 996–1002
F
INITE-AUTOMATON-MAT C H E R, 999
finite group, 940
finite sequence, 1166
finite set, 1161
first-fit heuristic, 1134 pr.
first-in, first-out, 232
see alsoqueue
fixed-length code, 429

Index1265
floating-point data type, 23
floor function (
bc
), 54
in master theorem, 103–106
floor instruction, 23
flow, 709–714
aggregate, 863
augmentation of, 716
blocking, 765
cancellation of, 717
excess, 736
integer-valued, 733
net, across a cut, 720
value of, 710
flow conservation, 709–710
flow network, 709–714
corresponding to a bipartite graph, 732
cut of, 720–724
with multiple sources and sinks, 712
F
LOYD-WARSHALL, 695
F
LOYD-WARSHALL
0
, 699 ex.
Floyd-Warshall algorithm, 693–697,
699–700 ex., 706
multithreaded, 797 ex.
F
ORD-FULKERSON, 724
Ford-Fulkerson method, 714–731, 765
F
ORD-FULKERSON-METHOD, 715
forest, 1172–1173
depth-first, 603
disjoint-set, 568–572
for, in pseudocode, 20–21
and loop invariants, 19 n.
formal power series, 108 pr.
formula satisfiability,1079–1081, 1105
forward edge, 609
forward substitution, 816–817
Fourier transform,seediscrete Fourier
transform, fast Fourier transform
fractional knapsack problem, 426, 428 ex.
free agent, 411 pr.
freeing of objects, 243–244
free list, 243
F
REE-OBJECT, 244
free tree, 1172–1176
frequency domain, 898
full binary tree, 1178, 1180 ex.
relation to optimal code, 430
full node, 489
full rank, 1223
full walk of a tree, 1114
fully parenthesized matrix-chain product, 370
fully polynomial-time approximation scheme,
1107
for subset sum, 1128–1134, 1139
function, 1166–1168
Ackermann’s, 585
basis, 835
convex, 1199
final-state, 996
hash,seehash function
linear, 26, 845
objective, 664, 847, 851
potential, 459
prefix, 1003–1004
quadratic, 27
reduction, 1067
suffix, 996
transition, 995, 1001–1002, 1012 ex.
functional iteration, 58
fundamental theorem of linear programming,
892
furthest-in-future strategy, 449 pr.
fusion tree, 212, 483
fuzzy sorting, 189 pr.
Gabow’s scaling algorithm for single-source
shortest paths, 679 pr.
gap character, 989 ex., 1002 ex.
gap heuristic, 760 ex., 766
garbage collection, 151, 243
gate, 1070
Gaussian elimination, 819, 842
gcd,seegreatest common divisor
general number-field sieve, 984
generating function, 108 pr.
generator
of a subgroup, 944
ofZ

n
, 955
G
ENERIC-MST, 626
G
ENERIC-PUSH-RELABEL, 741
generic push-relabel algorithm, 740–748
geometric distribution, 1202–1203
and balls and bins, 134
geometric series, 1147
geometry, computational, 1014–1047
GF.2/, 1227 pr.
gift wrapping, 1037, 1047

1266Index
global variable, 21
Goldberg’s algorithm,seepush-relabel
algorithm
golden ratio (), 59, 108 pr.
gossiping, 478
G
RAFT, 583 pr.
Graham’s scan, 1030–1036, 1047
G
RAHAM-SCAN, 1031
graph, 1168–1173
adjacency-list representation of, 590
adjacency-matrix representation of, 591
algorithms for, 587–766
and asymptotic notation, 588
attributes of, 588, 592
breadth-first search of, 594–602, 623
coloring of, 1103 pr.
complement of, 1090
component, 617
constraint, 666–668
dense, 589
depth-first search of, 603–612, 623
dynamic, 562 n.
-dense, 706 pr.
hamiltonian, 1061
incidence matrix of, 448 pr., 593 ex.
interval, 422 ex.
nonhamiltonian, 1061
shortest path in, 597
singly connected, 612 ex.
sparse, 589
static, 562 n.
subproblem, 367–368
tour of, 1096
weighted, 591
see alsodirected acyclic graph, directed
graph, flow network, undirected graph,
tree
graphic matroid, 437–438, 642
GRAPH-ISOMORPHISM, 1065 ex.
gray vertex, 594, 603
greatest common divisor (gcd), 929–930,
933 ex.
binary gcd algorithm for, 981 pr.
Euclid’s algorithm for, 933–939, 981 pr., 983
with more than two arguments, 939 ex.
recursion theorem for, 934
greedoid, 450
G
REEDY, 440
G
REEDY-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR, 421
greedy algorithm, 414–450
for activity selection, 415–422
for coin changing, 446 pr.
compared with dynamic programming, 381,
390 ex., 418, 423–427
Dijkstra’s algorithm, 658–664
elements of, 423–428
for fractional knapsack problem, 426
greedy-choice property in, 424–425
for Huffman code, 428–437
Kruskal’s algorithm, 631–633
and matroids, 437–443
for minimum spanning tree, 631–638
for multithreaded scheduling, 781–783
for off-line caching, 449 pr.
optimal substructure in, 425
Prim’s algorithm, 634–636
for set cover, 1117–1122, 1139
for task scheduling, 443–446, 447–448 pr.
on a weighted matroid, 439–442
for weighted set cover, 1135 pr.
greedy-choice property, 424–425
of activity selection, 417–418
of Huffman codes, 433–434
of a weighted matroid, 441
greedy scheduler, 782
G
REEDY-SET-COVER, 1119
grid, 760 pr.
group, 939–946
cyclic, 955
operator ( ̊), 939
guessing the solution, in the substitution
method, 84–85
half 3-CNF satisfiability, 1101 ex.
half-open interval, 348
Hall’s theorem, 735 ex.
halting problem, 1048
halving lemma, 908
HAM-CYCLE, 1062
hamiltonian cycle, 1049, 1061, 1091–1096,
1105
hamiltonian graph, 1061
hamiltonian path, 1066 ex., 1101 ex.
HAM-PATH, 1066 ex.
handle, 163, 507
handshaking lemma, 1172 ex.

Index1267
harmonic number, 1147, 1153–1154
harmonic series, 1147, 1153–1154
H
ASH-DELETE, 277 ex.
hash function, 256, 262–269
auxiliary, 272
collision-resistant, 964
division method for, 263, 268–269 ex.
-universal, 269 ex.
multiplication methodfor, 263–264
universal, 265–268
hashing, 253–285
with chaining, 257–260, 283 pr.
double, 272–274, 277 ex.
k-universal, 284 pr.
in memoization, 365, 387
with open addressing, 269–277
perfect, 277–282, 285
to replace adjacency lists, 593 ex.
universal, 265–268
H
ASH-INSERT, 270, 277 ex.
H
ASH-SEARCH, 271, 277 ex.
hash table, 256–261
dynamic, 471 ex.
secondary, 278
see alsohashing
hash value, 256
hat-check problem, 122 ex.
head
in a disk drive, 485
of a linked list, 236
of a queue, 234
heap, 151–169
analyzed by potential method, 462 ex.
binomial, 527 pr.
building, 156–159, 166 pr.
compared with Fibonacci heaps, 506–507
d-ary, 167 pr., 706 pr.
deletion from, 166 ex.
in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 662
extracting the maximum key from, 163
Fibonacci,seeFibonacci heap
as garbage-collected storage, 151
height of, 153
in Huffman’s algorithm, 433
to implement a mergeable heap, 506
increasing a key in, 163–164
insertion into, 164
in Johnson’s algorithm, 704
max-heap, 152
maximum key of, 163
mergeable,seemergeable heap
min-heap, 153
in Prim’s algorithm, 636
as a priority queue, 162–166
relaxed, 530
running times of operations on, 506 fig.
and treaps, 333 pr.
2-3-4, 529 pr.
H
EAP-DECREASE-KEY, 165 ex.
H
EAP-DELETE, 166 ex.
H
EAP-EXTRACT-MAX, 163
H
EAP-EXTRACT-MIN, 165 ex.
H
EAP-INCREASE-KEY, 164
H
EAP-MAXIMUM, 163
H
EAP-MINIMUM, 165 ex.
heap property, 152
maintenance of, 154–156
vs. binary-search-tree property, 289 ex.
heapsort, 151–169
H
EAPSORT, 160
heel, 602 ex.
height
of a binomial tree, 527 pr.
black-, 309
of a B-tree, 489–490
of ad-ary heap, 167 pr.
of a decision tree, 193
exponential, 300
of a heap, 153
of a node in a heap, 153, 159 ex.
of a node in a tree, 1177
of a red-black tree, 309
of a tree, 1177
height-balanced tree, 333 pr.
height function, in push-relabel algorithms, 738
hereditary family of subsets, 437
Hermitian matrix, 832 ex.
high endpoint of an interval, 348
high function, 537, 546
H
IRE-ASSISTANT, 115
hiring problem, 114–115, 123–124, 145
on-line, 139–141
probabilistic analysis of, 120–121
hit
cache, 449 pr.
spurious, 991

1268Index
H
OARE-PARTITION, 185 pr.
H
OPCROFT-KARP, 764 pr.
Hopcroft-Karp bipartite matching algorithm,
763 pr.
horizontal ray, 1021 ex.
Horner’s rule, 41 pr., 900
in the Rabin-Karp algorithm, 990
H
UFFMAN, 431
Huffman code, 428–437, 450
hull, convex, 8, 1029–1039, 1046 pr.
Human Genome Project, 6
hyperedge, 1172
hypergraph, 1172
and bipartite graphs, 1173 ex.
ideal parallel computer, 779
idempotency laws for sets, 1159
identity, 939
identity matrix, 1218
if, in pseudocode, 20
image, 1167
image compression, 409 pr., 413
inadmissible edge, 749
incidence, 1169
incidence matrix
and difference constraints, 666
of a directed graph, 448 pr., 593 ex.
of an undirected graph, 448 pr.
inclusion and exclusion, 1163 ex.
incomplete step, 782
I
NCREASE-KEY, 162
increasing a key, in a max-heap, 163–164
I
NCREMENT, 454
incremental design method, 29
for finding the convex hull, 1030
in-degree, 1169
indentation in pseudocode, 20
independence
of events, 1192–1193, 1195 ex.
of random variables, 1197
of subproblems in dynamic programming,
383–384
independent family of subsets, 437
independent set, 1101 pr.
of tasks, 444
independent strands, 789
index function, 537, 546
index of an element ofZ

n
, 955
indicator random variable, 118–121
in analysis of expected height of a randomly
built binary search tree, 300–303
in analysis of inserting into a treap, 333 pr.
in analysis of streaks, 138–139
in analysis of the birthday paradox, 132–133
in approximation algorithm for
MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1124
in bounding the right tail of the binomial
distribution, 1212–1213
in bucket sort analysis, 202–204
expected value of, 118
in hashing analysis, 259–260
in hiring-problem analysis, 120–121
and linearity of expectation, 119
in quicksort analysis, 182–184, 187 pr.
in randomized-selection analysis, 217–219,
226 pr.
in universal-hashing analysis, 265–266
induced subgraph, 1171
inequality constraint, 852
and equality constraints, 853
inequality, linear, 846
infeasible linear program, 851
infeasible solution, 851
infinite sequence, 1166
infinite set, 1161
infinite sum, 1145
infinity, arithmetic with, 650
I
NITIALIZE-PREFLOW, 740
I
NITIALIZE-SIMPLEX, 871, 887
I
NITIALIZE-SINGLE-SOURCE, 648
initial strand, 779
injective function, 1167
inner product, 1222
inorder tree walk, 287, 293 ex., 342
I
NORDER-TREE-WALK, 288
in-place sorting, 17, 148, 206 pr.
input
to an algorithm, 5
to a combinational circuit, 1071
distribution of, 116, 122
to a logic gate, 1070
size of, 25
input alphabet, 995
I
NSERT, 162, 230, 463 ex., 505
insertion
into binary search trees, 294–295

Index1269
into a bit vector with a superimposed binary
tree, 534
into a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 534
into B-trees, 493–497
into chained hash tables, 258
intod-ary heaps, 167 pr.
into direct-address tables, 254
into dynamic tables, 464–467
elementary, 465
into Fibonacci heaps, 510–511
into heaps, 164
into interval trees, 349
into linked lists, 237–238
into open-address hash tables, 270
into order-statistic trees, 343
into proto van Emde Boas structures, 544
into queues, 234
into red-black trees, 315–323
into stacks, 232
into sweep-line statuses, 1024
into treaps, 333 pr.
into 2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
into van Emde Boas trees, 552–554
into Young tableaus, 167 pr.
insertion sort, 12, 16–20, 25–27
in bucket sort, 201–204
compared with merge sort, 14 ex.
compared with quicksort, 178 ex.
decision tree for, 192 fig.
in merge sort, 39 pr.
in quicksort, 185 ex.
using binary search, 39 ex.
I
NSERTION-SORT, 18, 26, 208 pr.
instance
of an abstract problem, 1051, 1054
of a problem, 5
instructions of the RAM model, 23
integer data type, 23
integer linear programming, 850, 895 pr.,
1101 ex.
integers (Z), 1158
integer-valued flow, 733
integrality theorem, 734
integral, to approximate summations,
1154–1156
integration of a series, 1147
interior of a polygon, 1020 ex.
interior-point method, 850, 897
intermediate vertex, 693
internal node, 1176
internal path length, 1180 ex.
interpolation by a cubic spline, 840 pr.
interpolation by a polynomial, 901, 906 ex.
at complex roots of unity, 912–913
intersection
of chords, 345 ex.
determining, for a set of line segments,
1021–1029, 1047
determining, for two line segments,
1017–1019
of languages, 1058
of sets (\), 1159
interval, 348
fuzzy sorting of, 189 pr.
I
NTERVAL-DELETE, 349
interval graph, 422 ex.
I
NTERVAL-INSERT, 349
I
NTERVAL-SEARCH, 349, 351
I
NTERVAL-SEARCH-EXACTLY, 354 ex.
interval tree, 348–354
interval trichotomy, 348
intractability, 1048
invalid shift, 985
inventory planning, 411 pr.
inverse
of a bijective function, 1167
in a group, 940
of a matrix, 827–831, 842, 1223, 1225 ex.
multiplicative, modulon, 949
inversion
in a self-organizing list, 476 pr.
in a sequence, 41 pr., 122 ex., 345 ex.
inverter, 1070
invertible matrix, 1223
isolated vertex, 1169
isomorphic graphs, 1171
iterated function, 63 pr.
iterated logarithm function, 58–59
I
TERATIVE-FFT, 917
I
TERATIVE-TREE-SEARCH, 291
iter function, 577
Jarvis’s march, 1037–1038, 1047
Jensen’s inequality, 1199
J
OHNSON, 704

1270Index
Johnson’s algorithm, 700–706
joining
of red-black trees, 332 pr.
of 2-3-4 trees, 503 pr.
joint probability density function, 1197
Josephus permutation, 355 pr.
Karmarkar’s algorithm, 897
Karp’s minimum mean-weight cycle algorithm,
680 pr.
k-ary tree, 1179
k-CNF, 1049
k-coloring, 1103 pr., 1180 pr.
k-combination, 1185
k-conjunctive normal form, 1049
kernel of a polygon, 1038 ex.
key, 16, 147, 162, 229
dummy, 397
interpreted as a natural number, 263
median, of a B-tree node, 493
public, 959, 962
secret, 959, 962
static, 277
keywords, in pseudocode, 20–22
multithreaded, 774, 776–777, 785–786
“killer adversary” for quicksort, 190
Kirchhoff’s current law, 708
Kleene star (

), 1058
KMP algorithm, 1002–1013
KMP-M
AT C H E R, 1005
knapsack problem
fractional, 426, 428 ex.
0-1, 425, 427 ex., 1137 pr., 1139
k-neighbor tree, 338
knot, of a spline, 840 pr.
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm, 1002–1013
k-permutation, 126, 1184
Kraft inequality, 1180 ex.
Kruskal’s algorithm, 631–633, 642
with integer edge weights, 637 ex.
k-sorted, 207 pr.
k-string, 1184
k-subset, 1161
k-substring, 1184
kth power, 933 ex.
k-universal hashing, 284 pr.
Lagrange’s formula, 902
Lagrange’s theorem, 944
Lam ́e’s theorem, 936
language, 1057
completeness of, 1077 ex.
proving NP-completeness of, 1078–1079
verification of, 1063
last-in, first-out, 232
see alsostack
late task, 444
layers
convex, 1044 pr.
maximal, 1045 pr.
LCA, 584 pr.
lcm (least common multiple), 939 ex.
LCS, 7, 390–397, 413
LCS-L
ENGTH, 394
leading submatrix, 833, 839 ex.
leaf, 1176
least common ancestor, 584 pr.
least common multiple, 939 ex.
least-squares approximation, 835–839
leaving a vertex, 1169
leaving variable, 867
L
EFT, 152
left child, 1178
left-child, right-sibling representation, 246,
249 ex.
L
EFT-ROTATE, 313, 353 ex.
left rotation, 312
left spine, 333 pr.
left subtree, 1178
Legendre symbol.
a
p
/, 982 pr.
length
of a path, 1170
of a sequence, 1166
of a spine, 333 pr.
of a string, 986, 1184
level
of a function, 573
of a tree, 1177
level function, 576
lexicographically less than, 304 pr.
lexicographic sorting, 304 pr.
lg (binary logarithm), 56
lg

(iterated logarithm function), 58–59
lg
k
(exponentiation of logarithms), 56
lg lg (composition of logarithms), 56
LIFO (last-in, first-out), 232

Index1271
see alsostack
light edge, 626
linear constraint, 846
linear dependence, 1223
linear equality, 845
linear equations
solving modular, 946–950
solving systems of, 813–827
solving tridiagonal systems of, 840 pr.
linear function, 26, 845
linear independence, 1223
linear inequality, 846
linear-inequality feasibility problem, 894 pr.
linearity of expectation, 1198
and indicator random variables, 119
linearity of summations, 1146
linear order, 1165
linear permutation, 1229 pr.
linear probing, 272
linear programming, 7, 843–897
algorithms for, 850
applications of, 849
duality in, 879–886
ellipsoid algorithm for, 850, 897
finding an initial solution in, 886–891
fundamental theorem of, 892
interior-point methods for, 850, 897
Karmarkar’s algorithm for, 897
and maximum flow, 860–861
and minimum-cost circulation, 896 pr.
and minimum-cost flow, 861–862
and minimum-cost multicommodity flow,
864 ex.
and multicommodity flow, 862–863
simplex algorithm for, 864–879, 896
and single-pair shortest path, 859–860
and single-source shortest paths, 664–670,
863 ex.
slack form for, 854–857
standard form for, 850–854
see alsointeger linear programming, 0-1
integer programming
linear-programming relaxation, 1125
linear search, 22 ex.
linear speedup, 780
line segment, 1015
comparable, 1022
determining turn of, 1017
determining whether any intersect,
1021–1029, 1047
determining whether two intersect,
1017–1019
link
of binomial trees, 527 pr.
of Fibonacci-heap roots, 513
of trees in a disjoint-set forest, 570–571
L
INK, 571
linked list, 236–241
compact, 245 ex., 250 pr.
deletion from, 238
to implement disjoint sets, 564–568
insertion into, 237–238
neighbor list, 750
searching, 237, 268 ex.
self-organizing, 476 pr.
list,seelinked list
L
IST-DELETE, 238
L
IST-DELETE
0
, 238
L
IST-INSERT, 238
L
IST-INSERT
0
, 240
L
IST-SEARCH, 237
L
IST-SEARCH
0
, 239
literal, 1082
little-oh notation, 50–51, 64
little-omega notation, 51
L
m
-distance, 1044 ex.
ln (natural logarithm), 56
load factor
of a dynamic table, 463
of a hash table, 258
load instruction, 23
local variable, 21
logarithm function (log), 56–57
discrete, 955
iterated (lg

), 58–59
logical parallelism, 777
logic gate, 1070
longest common subsequence, 7, 390–397, 413
longest palindrome subsequence, 405 pr.
LONGEST-PATH, 1060 ex.
LONGEST-PATH-LENGTH, 1060 ex.
longest simple cycle, 1101 ex.
longest simple path, 1048
in an unweighted graph, 382
in a weighted directed acyclic graph, 404 pr.
L
OOKUP-CHAIN, 388

1272Index
loop, in pseudocode, 20
parallel, 785–787
loop invariant, 18–19
for breadth-first search, 595
for building a heap, 157
for consolidating the root list of a Fibonacci
heap, 517
for determining the rank of an element in an
order-statistic tree, 342
for Dijkstra’s algorithm, 660
andforloops, 19 n.
for the generic minimum-spanning-tree
method, 625
for the generic push-relabel algorithm, 743
for Graham’s scan, 1034
for heapsort, 160 ex.
for Horner’s rule, 41 pr.
for increasing a key in a heap, 166 ex.
initialization of, 19
for insertion sort, 18
maintenance of, 19
for merging, 32
for modular exponentiation, 957
origin of, 42
for partitioning, 171
for Prim’s algorithm, 636
for the Rabin-Karp algorithm, 993
for randomly permuting an array, 127,
128 ex.
for red-black tree insertion, 318
for the relabel-to-front algorithm, 755
for searching an interval tree, 352
for the simplex algorithm, 872
for string-matching automata, 998, 1000
and termination, 19
low endpoint of an interval, 348
lower bounds
on approximations, 1140
asymptotic, 48
for average sorting, 207 pr.
on binomial coefficients, 1186
for comparting water jugs, 206 pr.
for convex hull, 1038 ex., 1047
for disjoint-set data structures, 585
for finding the minimum, 214
for finding the predecessor, 560
for length of an optimal traveling-salesman
tour, 1112–1115
for median finding, 227
for merging, 208 pr.
for minimum-weight vertex cover,
1124–1126
for multithreaded computations, 780
and potential functions, 478
for priority-queue operations, 531
and recurrences, 67
for simultaneous minimum and maximum,
215 ex.
for size of an optimal vertex cover, 1110,
1135 pr.
for sorting, 191–194, 205 pr., 211, 531
for streaks, 136–138, 142 ex.
on summations, 1152, 1154
lower median, 213
lower square root

#
p

, 546
lower-triangular matrix, 1219, 1222 ex.,
1225 ex.
low function, 537, 546
LU decomposition, 806 pr., 819–822
LU-D
ECOMPOSITION, 821
LUP decomposition, 806 pr., 815
computation of, 822–825
of a diagonal matrix, 827 ex.
in matrix inversion, 828
and matrix multiplication, 832 ex.
of a permutation matrix, 827 ex.
use of, 815–819
LUP-D
ECOMPOSITION, 824
LUP-S
OLVE, 817
main memory, 484
M
AKE-HEAP, 505
M
AKE-SET, 561
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 571
linked-list implementation of, 564
makespan, 1136 pr.
M
AKE-TREE, 583 pr.
Manhattan distance, 225 pr., 1044 ex.
marked node, 508, 519–520
Markov’s inequality, 1201 ex.
master method for solving a recurrence, 93–97
master theorem, 94
proof of, 97–106
matched vertex, 732
matching
bipartite, 732, 763 pr.

Index1273
maximal, 1110, 1135 pr.
maximum, 1135 pr.
and maximum flow, 732–736, 747 ex.
perfect, 735 ex.
of strings, 985–1013
weighted bipartite, 530
matric matroid, 437
matrix, 1217–1229
addition of, 1220
adjacency, 591
conjugate transpose of, 832 ex.
determinant of, 1224–1225
diagonal, 1218
Hermitian, 832 ex.
identity, 1218
incidence, 448 pr., 593 ex.
inversion of, 806 pr., 827–831, 842
lower-triangular, 1219, 1222 ex., 1225 ex.
multiplication of,seematrix multiplication
negative of, 1220
permutation, 1220, 1222 ex.
predecessor, 685
product of, with a vector, 785–787, 789–790,
792 ex.
pseudoinverse of, 837
scalar multiple of, 1220
subtraction of, 1221
symmetric, 1220
symmetric positive-definite, 832–835, 842
Toeplitz, 921 pr.
transpose of, 797 ex., 1217
transpose of, multithreaded, 792 ex.
tridiagonal, 1219
unit lower-triangular, 1219
unit upper-triangular, 1219
upper-triangular, 1219, 1225 ex.
Vandermonde, 902, 1226 pr.
matrix-chain multiplication, 370–378
M
AT R I X-CHAIN-MULTIPLY
MAT R I X-CHAIN-ORDER, 375
matrix multiplication, 75–83, 1221
for all-pairs shortest paths, 686–693,
706–707
boolean, 832 ex.
and computing the determinant, 832 ex.
divide-and-conquer method for, 76–83
and LUP decomposition, 832 ex.
and matrix inversion, 828–831, 842
multithreaded algorithm for, 792–797,
806 pr.
Pan’s method for, 82 ex.
Strassen’s algorithm for, 79–83, 111–112
M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY, 371
matrix-vector multiplication, multithreaded,
785–787, 792 ex.
with race, 789–790
matroid, 437–443, 448 pr., 450, 642
for task scheduling, 443–446
M
AT-VEC, 785
M
AT-VEC-MAIN-LOOP, 786
M
AT-VEC-WRONG, 790
MAX-CNF satisfiability, 1127 ex.
MAX-CUT problem, 1127 ex.
M
AX-FLOW-BY-SCALING, 763 pr.
max-flow min-cut theorem, 723
max-heap, 152
building, 156–159
d-ary, 167 pr.
deletion from, 166 ex.
extracting the maximum key from, 163
in heapsort, 159–162
increasing a key in, 163–164
insertion into, 164
maximum key of, 163
as a max-priority queue, 162–166
mergeable, 250 n., 481 n., 505 n.
M
AX-HEAPIFY, 154
M
AX-HEAP-INSERT, 164
building a heap with, 166 pr.
max-heap property, 152
maintenance of, 154–156
maximal element, of a partially ordered set,
1165
maximal layers, 1045 pr.
maximal matching, 1110, 1135 pr.
maximal point, 1045 pr.
maximal subset, in a matroid, 438
maximization linear program, 846
and minimization linear programs, 852
maximum, 213
in binary search trees, 291
of a binomial distribution, 1207 ex.
in a bit vector with a superimposed binary
tree, 533
in a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 535

1274Index
finding, 214–215
in heaps, 163
in order-statistic trees, 347 ex.
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 544 ex.
in red-black trees, 311
in van Emde Boas trees, 550
M
AXIMUM, 162–163, 230
maximum bipartite matching, 732–736,
747 ex., 766
Hopcroft-Karp algorithm for, 763 pr.
maximum degree, in a Fibonacci heap, 509,
523–526
maximum flow, 708–766
Edmonds-Karp algorithm for, 727–730
Ford-Fulkerson method for, 714–731, 765
as a linear program, 860–861
and maximum bipartite matching, 732–736,
747 ex.
push-relabel algorithms for, 736–760, 765
relabel-to-front algorithm for, 748–760
scaling algorithm for, 762 pr., 765
updating, 762 pr.
maximum matching, 1135 pr.
maximum spanning tree, 1137 pr.
maximum-subarray problem, 68–75, 111
max-priority queue, 162
MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1123–1124, 1139
M
AY B E-MST-A, 641 pr.
M
AY B E-MST-B, 641 pr.
M
AY B E-MST-C, 641 pr.
mean,seeexpected value
mean weight of a cycle, 680 pr.
median, 213–227
multithreaded algorithm for, 805 ex.
of sorted lists, 223 ex.
of two sorted lists, 804 ex.
weighted, 225 pr.
median key, of a B-tree node, 493
median-of-3 method, 188 pr.
member of a set (2), 1158
membership
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 540–541
in Van Emde Boas trees, 550
memoization, 365, 387–389
M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD, 365
M
EMOIZED-CUT-ROD-AUX, 366
M
EMOIZED-MAT R I X-CHAIN, 388
memory, 484
memory hierarchy, 24
M
ERGE,31
mergeable heap, 481, 505
binomial heaps, 527 pr.
linked-list implementation of, 250 pr.
relaxed heaps, 530
running times of operations on, 506 fig.
2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
see alsoFibonacci heap
mergeable max-heap, 250 n., 481 n., 505 n.
mergeable min-heap, 250 n., 481 n., 505
M
ERGE-LISTS, 1129
merge sort, 12, 30–37
compared with insertion sort, 14 ex.
multithreaded algorithm for, 797–805, 812
use of insertion sort in, 39 pr.
M
ERGE-SORT,34
M
ERGE-SORT
0
, 797
merging
ofksorted lists, 166 ex.
lower bounds for, 208 pr.
multithreaded algorithm for, 798–801
of two sorted arrays, 30
M
ILLER-RABIN, 970
Miller-Rabin primality test, 968–975, 983
M
IN-GAP, 354 ex.
min-heap, 153
analyzed by potential method, 462 ex.
building, 156–159
d-ary, 706 pr.
in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 662
in Huffman’s algorithm, 433
in Johnson’s algorithm, 704
mergeable, 250 n., 481 n., 505
as a min-priority queue, 165 ex.
in Prim’s algorithm, 636
M
IN-HEAPIFY, 156 ex.
M
IN-HEAP-INSERT, 165 ex.
min-heap ordering, 507
min-heap property, 153, 507
maintenance of, 156 ex.
in treaps, 333 pr.
vs. binary-search-tree property, 289 ex.
minimization linear program, 846
and maximization linear programs, 852
minimum, 213
in binary search trees, 291

Index1275
in a bit vector with a superimposed binary
tree, 533
in a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 535
in B-trees, 497 ex.
in Fibonacci heaps, 511
finding, 214–215
off-line, 582 pr.
in order-statistic trees, 347 ex.
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 541–542
in red-black trees, 311
in 2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
in van Emde Boas trees, 550
M
INIMUM, 162, 214, 230, 505
minimum-cost circulation, 896 pr.
minimum-cost flow, 861–862
minimum-cost multicommodity flow, 864 ex.
minimum-cost spanning tree,seeminimum
spanning tree
minimum cut, 721, 731 ex.
minimum degree, of a B-tree, 489
minimum mean-weight cycle, 680 pr.
minimum node, of a Fibonacci heap, 508
minimum path cover, 761 pr.
minimum spanning tree, 624–642
in approximation algorithm for
traveling-salesman problem, 1112
Bor  ̇uvka’s algorithm for, 641
on dynamic graphs, 637 ex.
generic method for, 625–630
Kruskal’s algorithm for, 631–633
Prim’s algorithm for, 634–636
relation to matroids, 437, 439–440
second-best, 638 pr.
minimum-weight spanning tree,seeminimum
spanning tree
minimum-weight vertex cover, 1124–1127,
1139
minor of a matrix, 1224
min-priority queue, 162
in constructing Huffman codes, 431
in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 661
in Prim’s algorithm, 634, 636
miss, 449 pr.
missing child, 1178
mod, 54, 928
modifying operation, 230
modular arithmetic, 54, 923 pr., 939–946
modular equivalence, 54, 1165 ex.
modular exponentiation, 956
M
ODULAR-EXPONENTIATION, 957
modular linear equations, 946–950
M
ODULAR-LINEAR-EQUATION-SOLVER,
949
modulo, 54, 928
Monge array, 110 pr.
monotone sequence, 168
monotonically decreasing, 53
monotonically increasing, 53
Monty Hall problem, 1195 ex.
move-to-front heuristic, 476 pr., 478
MST-K
RUSKAL, 631
MST-P
RIM, 634
MST-R
EDUCE, 639 pr.
much-greater-than (), 574
much-less-than (), 783
multicommodity flow, 862–863
minimum-cost, 864 ex.
multicore computer, 772
multidimensional fast Fourier transform,
921 pr.
multigraph, 1172
converting to equivalent undirected graph,
593 ex.
multiple, 927
of an element modulon, 946–950
least common, 939 ex.
scalar, 1220
multiple assignment, 21
multiple sources and sinks, 712
multiplication
of complex numbers, 83 ex.
divide-and-conquer method for, 920 pr.
of matrices,seematrix multiplication
of a matrix chain, 370–378
matrix-vector, multithreaded, 785–787,
789–790, 792 ex.
modulon(
n
), 940
of polynomials, 899
multiplication method, 263–264
multiplicative group modulon, 941
multiplicative inverse, modulon, 949
multiply instruction, 23
M
ULTIPOP, 453
multiprocessor, 772
M
ULTIPUSH, 456 ex.

1276Index
multiset, 1158 n.
multithreaded algorithm, 10, 772–812
for computing Fibonacci numbers, 774–780
for fast Fourier transform, 804 ex.
Floyd-Warshall algorithm, 797 ex.
for LU decomposition, 806 pr.
for LUP decomposition, 806 pr.
for matrix inversion, 806 pr.
for matrix multiplication, 792–797, 806 pr.
for matrix transpose, 792 ex., 797 ex.
for matrix-vector product, 785–787,
789–790, 792 ex.
for median, 805 ex.
for merge sorting, 797–805, 812
for merging, 798–801
for order statistics, 805 ex.
for partitioning, 804 ex.
for prefix computation, 807 pr.
for quicksort, 811 pr.
for reduction, 807 pr.
for a simple stencil calculation, 809 pr.
for solving systems of linear equations,
806 pr.
Strassen’s algorithm, 795–796
multithreaded composition, 784 fig.
multithreaded computation, 777
multithreaded scheduling, 781–783
mutually exclusive events, 1190
mutually independent events, 1193
N(set of natural numbers), 1158
naive algorithm, for string matching, 988–990
N
AIVE-STRING-MAT C H E R, 988
natural cubic spline, 840 pr.
natural numbers (N), 1158
keys interpreted as, 263
negative of a matrix, 1220
negative-weight cycle
and difference constraints, 667
and relaxation, 677 ex.
and shortest paths, 645, 653–654, 692 ex.,
700 ex.
negative-weight edges, 645–646
neighbor, 1172
neighborhood, 735 ex.
neighbor list, 750
nested parallelism, 776, 805 pr.
nesting boxes, 678 pr.
net flow across a cut, 720
network
admissible, 749–750
flow,seeflow network
residual, 715–719
for sorting, 811
N
EXT-TO-TOP, 1031
NIL,21
node, 1176
see alsovertex
nonbasic variable, 855
nondeterministic multithreaded algorithm, 787
nondeterministic polynomial time, 1064 n.
see alsoNP
nonhamiltonian graph, 1061
noninstance, 1056 n.
noninvertible matrix, 1223
nonnegativity constraint, 851, 853
nonoverlappable string pattern, 1002 ex.
nonsaturating push, 739, 745
nonsingular matrix, 1223
nontrivial power, 933 ex.
nontrivial square root of1, modulon, 956
no-path property, 650, 672
normal equation, 837
norm of a vector, 1222
NOT function (:), 1071
not a set member (62), 1158
not equivalent (6), 54
NOT gate, 1070
NP (complexity class), 1049, 1064, 1066 ex.,
1105
NPC (complexity class), 1050, 1069
NP-complete, 1050, 1069
NP-completeness, 9–10, 1048–1105
of the circuit-satisfiability problem,
1070–1077
of the clique problem, 1086–1089, 1105
of determining whether a boolean formula is
a tautology, 1086 ex.
of the formula-satisfiability problem,
1079–1081, 1105
of the graph-coloring problem, 1103 pr.
of the half 3-CNF satisfiability problem,
1101 ex.
of the hamiltonian-cycle problem,
1091–1096, 1105
of the hamiltonian-path problem, 1101 ex.

Index1277
of the independent-set problem, 1101 pr.
of integer linear programming, 1101 ex.
of the longest-simple-cycle problem,
1101 ex.
proving, of a language, 1078–1079
of scheduling with profits and deadlines,
1104 pr.
of the set-covering problem, 1122 ex.
of the set-partition problem, 1101 ex.
of the subgraph-isomorphism problem,
1100 ex.
of the subset-sum problem, 1097–1100
of the 3-CNF-satisfiability problem,
1082–1085, 1105
of the traveling-salesman problem,
1096–1097
of the vertex-cover problem, 1089–1091,
1105
of 0-1 integer programming, 1100 ex.
NP-hard, 1069
n-set, 1161
n-tuple, 1162
null event, 1190
null tree, 1178
null vector, 1224
number-field sieve, 984
numerical stability, 813, 815, 842
n-vector, 1218
o-notation, 50–51, 64
O-notation, 45 fig., 47–48, 64
O
0
-notation, 62 pr.
e
O-notation, 62 pr.
object, 21
allocation and freeing of, 243–244
array implementation of, 241–246
passing as parameter, 21
objective function, 664, 847, 851
objective value, 847, 851
oblivious compare-exchange algorithm, 208 pr.
occurrence of a pattern, 985
O
FF-LINE-MINIMUM, 583 pr.
off-line problem
caching, 449 pr.
least common ancestors, 584 pr.
minimum, 582 pr.
Omega-notation, 45 fig., 48–49, 64
1-approximation algorithm, 1107
one-pass method, 585
one-to-one correspondence, 1167
one-to-one function, 1167
on-line convex-hull problem, 1039 ex.
on-line hiring problem, 139–141
O
N-LINE-MAXIMUM, 140
on-line multithreaded scheduler, 781
O
N-SEGMENT, 1018
onto function, 1167
open-address hash table, 269–277
with double hashing, 272–274, 277 ex.
with linear probing, 272
with quadratic probing, 272, 283 pr.
open interval, 348
OpenMP, 774
optimal binary search tree, 397–404, 413
O
PTIMAL-BST, 402
optimal objective value, 851
optimal solution, 851
optimal subset, of a matroid, 439
optimal substructure
of activity selection, 416
of binary search trees, 399–400
in dynamic programming, 379–384
of the fractional knapsack problem, 426
in greedy algorithms, 425
of Huffman codes, 435
of longest common subsequences, 392–393
of matrix-chain multiplication, 373
of rod-cutting, 362
of shortest paths, 644–645, 687, 693–694
of unweighted shortest paths, 382
of weighted matroids, 442
of the 0-1 knapsack problem, 426
optimal vertex cover, 1108
optimization problem, 359, 1050, 1054
approximation algorithms for, 10,
1106–1140
and decision problems, 1051
OR function (_), 697, 1071
order
of a group, 945
linear, 1165
partial, 1165
total, 1165
ordered pair, 1161
ordered tree, 1177
order of growth, 28

1278Index
order statistics, 213–227
dynamic, 339–345
multithreaded algorithm for, 805 ex.
order-statistic tree, 339–345
querying, 347 ex.
OR gate, 1070
origin, 1015
or, in pseudocode, 22
orthonormal, 842
OS-K
EY-RANK, 344 ex.
OS-R
ANK, 342
OS-S
ELECT, 341
out-degree, 1169
outer product, 1222
output
of an algorithm, 5
of a combinational circuit, 1071
of a logic gate, 1070
overdetermined system of linear equations, 814
overflow
of a queue, 235
of a stack, 233
overflowing vertex, 736
discharge of, 751
overlapping intervals, 348
finding all, 354 ex.
point of maximum overlap, 354 pr.
overlapping rectangles, 354 ex.
overlapping subproblems, 384–386
overlapping-suffix lemma, 987
P (complexity class), 1049, 1055, 1059,
1061 ex., 1105
package wrapping, 1037, 1047
page on a disk, 486, 499 ex., 502 pr.
pair, ordered, 1161
pairwise disjoint sets, 1161
pairwise independence, 1193
pairwise relatively prime, 931
palindrome, 405 pr.
Pan’s method for matrix multiplication, 82 ex.
parallel algorithm, 10, 772
see alsomultithreaded algorithm
parallel computer, 772
ideal, 779
parallel for, in pseudocode, 785–786
parallelism
logical, 777
of a multithreaded computation, 780
nested, 776
of a randomized multithreaded algorithm,
811 pr.
parallel loop, 785–787, 805 pr.
parallel-machine-scheduling problem, 1136 pr.
parallel prefix, 807 pr.
parallel random-access machine, 811
parallel slackness, 781
rule of thumb, 783
parallel, strands being logically in, 778
parameter, 21
costs of passing, 107 pr.
parent
in a breadth-first tree, 594
in a multithreaded computation, 776
in a rooted tree, 1176
P
ARENT, 152
parenthesis structure of depth-first search, 606
parenthesis theorem, 606
parenthesization of a matrix-chain product, 370
parse tree, 1082
partially ordered set, 1165
partial order, 1165
P
ARTITION, 171
P
ARTITION
0
, 186 pr.
partition function, 361 n.
partitioning, 171–173
around median of 3 elements, 185 ex.
Hoare’s method for, 185 pr.
multithreaded algorithm for, 804 ex.
randomized, 179
partition of a set, 1161, 1164
Pascal’s triangle, 1188 ex.
path, 1170
augmenting, 719–720, 763 pr.
critical, 657
find, 569
hamiltonian, 1066 ex.
longest, 382, 1048
shortest,seeshortest paths
simple, 1170
weight of, 643
PATH, 1051, 1058
path compression, 569
path cover, 761 pr.
path length, of a tree, 304 pr., 1180 ex.
path-relaxation property, 650, 673

Index1279
pattern, in string matching, 985
nonoverlappable, 1002 ex.
pattern matching,seestring matching
penalty, 444
perfect hashing, 277–282, 285
perfect linear speedup, 780
perfect matching, 735 ex.
permutation, 1167
bit-reversal, 472 pr., 918
Josephus, 355 pr.
k-permutation, 126, 1184
linear, 1229 pr.
in place, 126
random, 124–128
of a set, 1184
uniform random, 116, 125
permutation matrix, 1220, 1222 ex., 1226 ex.
LUP decomposition of, 827 ex.
P
ERMUTE-BY-CYCLIC, 129 ex.
P
ERMUTE-BY-SORTING, 125
P
ERMUTE-WITH-ALL, 129 ex.
P
ERMUTE-WITHOUT-IDENTITY, 128 ex.
persistent data structure, 331 pr., 482
P
ERSISTENT-TREE-INSERT, 331 pr.
PERT chart, 657, 657 ex.
P-F
IB, 776
phase, of the relabel-to-front algorithm, 758
phi function (.n/), 943
P
ISANO-DELETE, 526 pr.
pivot
in linear programming, 867, 869–870,
878 ex.
in LU decomposition, 821
in quicksort, 171
P
IVOT, 869
platter, 485
P-M
AT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE, 794
P-M
ERGE, 800
P-M
ERGE-SORT, 803
pointer, 21
array implementation of, 241–246
trailing, 295
point-value representation, 901
polar angle, 1020 ex.
Pollard’s rho heuristic, 976–980, 980 ex., 984
P
OLLARD-RHO, 976
polygon, 1020 ex.
kernel of, 1038 ex.
star-shaped, 1038 ex.
polylogarithmically bounded, 57
polynomial, 55, 898
addition of, 898
asymptotic behavior of, 61 pr.
coefficient representation of, 900
derivatives of, 922 pr.
evaluation of, 41 pr., 900, 905 ex., 923 pr.
interpolation by, 901, 906 ex.
multiplication of, 899, 903–905, 920 pr.
point-value representation of, 901
polynomial-growth condition, 113
polynomially bounded, 55
polynomially related, 1056
polynomial-time acceptance, 1058
polynomial-time algorithm, 927, 1048
polynomial-time approximation scheme, 1107
for maximum clique, 1134 pr.
polynomial-time computability, 1056
polynomial-time decision, 1059
polynomial-time reducibility (
P
), 1067,
1077 ex.
polynomial-time solvability, 1055
polynomial-time verification, 1061–1066
P
OP, 233, 452
pop from a run-time stack, 188 pr.
positional tree, 1178
positive-definite matrix, 1225
post-office location problem, 225 pr.
postorder tree walk, 287
potential function, 459
for lower bounds, 478
potential method, 459–463
for binary counters, 461–462
for disjoint-set data structures, 575–581,
582 ex.
for dynamic tables, 466–471
for Fibonacci heaps, 509–512, 517–518,
520–522
for the generic push-relabel algorithm, 746
for min-heaps, 462 ex.
for restructuring red-black trees, 474 pr.
for self-organizing lists with move-to-front,
476 pr.
for stack operations, 460–461
potential, of a data structure, 459
power
of an element, modulon, 954–958

1280Index
kth, 933 ex.
nontrivial, 933 ex.
power series, 108 pr.
power set, 1161
Pr
fg
(probability distribution), 1190
PRAM, 811
predecessor
in binary search trees, 291–292
in a bit vector with a superimposed binary
tree, 534
in a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 535
in breadth-first trees, 594
in B-trees, 497 ex.
in linked lists, 236
in order-statistic trees, 347 ex.
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 544 ex.
in red-black trees, 311
in shortest-paths trees, 647
in Van Emde Boas trees, 551–552
P
REDECESSOR, 230
predecessor matrix, 685
predecessor subgraph
in all-pairs shortest paths, 685
in breadth-first search, 600
in depth-first search, 603
in single-source shortest paths, 647
predecessor-subgraph property, 650, 676
preemption, 447 pr.
prefix
of a sequence, 392
of a string (), 986
prefix code, 429
prefix computation, 807 pr.
prefix function, 1003–1004
prefix-function iteration lemma, 1007
preflow, 736, 765
preimage of a matrix, 1228 pr.
preorder, total, 1165
preorder tree walk, 287
presorting, 1043
Prim’s algorithm, 634–636, 642
with an adjacency matrix, 637 ex.
in approximation algorithm for
traveling-salesman problem, 1112
implemented with a Fibonacci heap, 636
implemented with a min-heap, 636
with integer edge weights, 637 ex.
similarity to Dijkstra’s algorithm, 634, 662
for sparse graphs, 638 pr.
primality testing, 965–975, 983
Miller-Rabin test, 968–975, 983
pseudoprimality testing, 966–968
primal linear program, 880
primary clustering, 272
primary memory, 484
prime distribution function, 965
prime number, 928
density of, 965–966
prime number theorem, 965
primitive root ofZ

n
, 955
principal root of unity, 907
principle of inclusion and exclusion, 1163 ex.
P
RINT-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H, 685
P
RINT-CUT-ROD-SOLUTION, 369
P
RINT-INTERSECTING-SEGMENTS, 1028 ex.
P
RINT-LCS, 395
P
RINT-OPTIMAL-PARENS, 377
P
RINT-PAT H, 601
P
RINT-SET, 572 ex.
priority queue, 162–166
in constructing Huffman codes, 431
in Dijkstra’s algorithm, 661
heap implementation of, 162–166
lower bounds for, 531
max-priority queue, 162
min-priority queue, 162, 165 ex.
with monotone extractions, 168
in Prim’s algorithm, 634, 636
proto van Emde Boas structure
implementation of, 538–545
van Emde Boas tree implementation of,
531–560
see alsobinary search tree, binomial heap,
Fibonacci heap
probabilistically checkable proof, 1105, 1140
probabilistic analysis, 115–116, 130–142
of approximation algorithm for
MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1124
and average inputs, 28
of average node depth in a randomly built
binary search tree, 304 pr.
of balls and bins, 133–134
of birthday paradox, 130–133
of bucket sort, 201–204, 204 ex.
of collisions, 261 ex., 282 ex.

Index1281
of convex hull over a sparse-hulled
distribution, 1046 pr.
of file comparison, 995 ex.
of fuzzy sorting of intervals, 189 pr.
of hashing with chaining, 258–260
of height of a randomly built binary search
tree, 299–303
of hiring problem, 120–121, 139–141
of insertion into a binary search tree with
equal keys, 303 pr.
of longest-probe bound for hashing, 282 pr.
of lower bound for sorting, 205 pr.
of Miller-Rabin primality test, 971–975
and multithreaded algorithms, 811 pr.
of on-line hiring problem, 139–141
of open-address hashing, 274–276, 277 ex.
of partitioning, 179 ex., 185 ex., 187–188 pr.
of perfect hashing, 279–282
of Pollard’s rho heuristic, 977–980
of probabilistic counting, 143 pr.
of quicksort, 181–184, 187–188 pr., 303 ex.
of Rabin-Karp algorithm, 994
and randomized algorithms, 123–124
of randomized selection, 217–219, 226 pr.
of searching a compact list, 250 pr.
of slot-size bound for chaining, 283 pr.
of sorting points by distance from origin,
204 ex.
of streaks, 135–139
of universal hashing, 265–268
probabilistic counting, 143 pr.
probability, 1189–1196
probability density function, 1196
probability distribution, 1190
probability distribution function, 204 ex.
probe sequence, 270
probing, 270, 282 pr.
see alsolinear probing, quadratic probing,
double hashing
problem
abstract, 1054
computational, 5–6
concrete, 1055
decision, 1051, 1054
intractable, 1048
optimization, 359, 1050, 1054
solution to, 6, 1054–1055
tractable, 1048
procedure, 6, 16–17
product.
Q
/, 1148
Cartesian, 1162
cross, 1016
inner, 1222
of matrices, 1221, 1226 ex.
outer, 1222
of polynomials, 899
rule of, 1184
scalar flow, 714 ex.
professional wrestler, 602 ex.
program counter, 1073
programming,seedynamic programming,
linear programming
proper ancestor, 1176
proper descendant, 1176
proper subgroup, 944
proper subset (), 1159
proto van Emde Boas structure, 538–545
cluster in, 538
compared with van Emde Boas trees, 547
deletion from, 544
insertion into, 544
maximum in, 544 ex.
membership in, 540–541
minimum in, 541–542
predecessor in, 544 ex.
successor in, 543–544
summary in, 540
P
ROTO-VEB-INSERT, 544
P
ROTO-VEB-MEMBER, 541
P
ROTO-VEB-MINIMUM, 542
proto-vEB structure,seeproto van Emde Boas
structure
P
ROTO-VEB-SUCCESSOR, 543
prune-and-search method, 1030
pruning a Fibonacci heap, 529 pr.
P-S
CAN-1, 808 pr.
P-S
CAN-2, 808 pr.
P-S
CAN-3, 809 pr.
P-S
CAN-DOWN, 809 pr.
P-S
CAN-UP, 809 pr.
pseudocode, 16, 20–22
pseudoinverse, 837
pseudoprime, 966–968
P
SEUDOPRIME, 967
pseudorandom-number generator, 117
P-S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY, 793

1282Index
P-T
RANSPOSE, 792 ex.
public key, 959, 962
public-key cryptosystem, 958–965, 983
P
USH
push-relabel operation, 739
stack operation, 233, 452
push onto a run-time stack, 188 pr.
push operation (in push-relabel algorithms),
738–739
nonsaturating, 739, 745
saturating, 739, 745
push-relabel algorithm, 736–760, 765
basic operations in, 738–740
by discharging an overflowing vertex of
maximum height, 760 ex.
to find a maximum bipartite matching,
747 ex.
gap heuristic for, 760 ex., 766
generic algorithm, 740–748
with a queue of overflowing vertices, 759 ex.
relabel-to-front algorithm, 748–760
quadratic function, 27
quadratic probing, 272, 283 pr.
quadratic residue, 982 pr.
quantile, 223 ex.
query, 230
queue, 232, 234–235
in breadth-first search, 595
implemented by stacks, 236 ex.
linked-list implementation of, 240 ex.
priority,seepriority queue
in push-relabel algorithms, 759 ex.
quicksort, 170–190
analysis of, 174–185
average-case analysis of, 181–184
compared with insertion sort, 178 ex.
compared with radix sort, 199
with equal element values, 186 pr.
good worst-case implementation of, 223 ex.
“killer adversary” for, 190
with median-of-3 method, 188 pr.
multithreaded algorithm for, 811 pr.
randomized version of, 179–180, 187 pr.
stack depth of, 188 pr.
tail-recursive version of, 188 pr.
use of insertion sort in, 185 ex.
worst-case analysis of, 180–181
Q
UICKSORT, 171
Q
UICKSORT
0
, 186 pr.
quotient, 928
R(set of real numbers), 1158
Rabin-Karp algorithm, 990–995, 1013
R
ABIN-KARP-MAT C H E R, 993
race, 787–790
R
ACE-EXAMPLE, 788
radix sort, 197–200
compared with quicksort, 199
R
ADIX-SORT, 198
radix tree, 304 pr.
RAM, 23–24
R
ANDOM, 117
random-access machine, 23–24
parallel, 811
randomized algorithm, 116–117, 122–130
and average inputs, 28
comparison sort, 205 pr.
for fuzzy sorting of intervals, 189 pr.
for hiring problem, 123–124
for insertion into a binary search tree with
equal keys, 303 pr.
for MAX-3-CNF satisfiability, 1123–1124,
1139
Miller-Rabin primality test, 968–975, 983
multithreaded, 811 pr.
for partitioning, 179, 185 ex., 187–188 pr.
for permuting an array, 124–128
Pollard’s rho heuristic, 976–980, 980 ex.,
984
and probabilistic analysis, 123–124
quicksort, 179–180, 185 ex., 187–188 pr.
randomized rounding, 1139
for searching a compact list, 250 pr.
for selection, 215–220
universal hashing, 265–268
worst-case performance of, 180 ex.
R
ANDOMIZED-HIRE-ASSISTANT, 124
R
ANDOMIZED-PARTITION, 179
R
ANDOMIZED-QUICKSORT, 179, 303 ex.
relation to randomly built binary search
trees, 304 pr.
randomized rounding, 1139
R
ANDOMIZED-SELECT, 216
R
ANDOMIZE-IN-PLACE, 126

Index1283
randomly built binary search tree, 299–303,
304 pr.
random-number generator, 117
random permutation, 124–128
uniform, 116, 125
R
ANDOM-SAMPLE, 130 ex.
random sampling, 129 ex., 179
R
ANDOM-SEARCH, 143 pr.
random variable, 1196–1201
indicator,seeindicator random variable
range, 1167
of a matrix, 1228 pr.
rank
column, 1223
full, 1223
of a matrix, 1223, 1226 ex.
of a node in a disjoint-set forest, 569, 575,
581 ex.
of a number in an ordered set, 300, 339
in order-statistic trees, 341–343, 344–345 ex.
row, 1223
rate of growth, 28
ray, 1021 ex.
RB-D
ELETE, 324
RB-D
ELETE-FIXUP, 326
RB-E
NUMERATE, 348 ex.
RB-I
NSERT, 315
RB-I
NSERT-FIXUP, 316
RB-J
OIN, 332 pr.
RB-T
RANSPLANT, 323
reachability in a graph (), 1170
real numbers (R), 1158
reconstructing an optimal solution, in dynamic
programming, 387
record, 147
rectangle, 354 ex.
recurrence, 34, 65–67, 83–113
solution by Akra-Bazzi method, 112–113
solution by master method, 93–97
solution by recursion-tree method, 88–93
solution by substitution method, 83–88
recurrence equation,seerecurrence
recursion, 30
recursion tree, 37, 88–93
in proof of master theorem, 98–100
and the substitution method, 91–92
R
ECURSIVE-ACTIVITY-SELECTOR, 419
recursive case, 65
R
ECURSIVE-FFT, 911
R
ECURSIVE-MAT R I X-CHAIN, 385
red-black tree, 308–338
augmentation of, 346–347
compared with B-trees, 484, 490
deletion from, 323–330
in determining whether any line segments
intersect, 1024
for enumerating keys in a range, 348 ex.
height of, 309
insertion into, 315–323
joining of, 332 pr.
maximum key of, 311
minimum key of, 311
predecessor in, 311
properties of, 308–312
relaxed, 311 ex.
restructuring, 474 pr.
rotation in, 312–314
searching in, 311
successor in, 311
see alsointerval tree, order-statistic tree
R
EDUCE, 807 pr.
reduced-space van Emde Boas tree, 557 pr.
reducibility, 1067–1068
reduction algorithm, 1052, 1067
reduction function, 1067
reduction, of an array, 807 pr.
reflexive relation, 1163
reflexivity of asymptotic notation, 51
region, feasible, 847
regularity condition, 95
rejection
by an algorithm, 1058
by a finite automaton, 996
R
ELABEL, 740
relabeled vertex, 740
relabel operation, in push-relabel algorithms,
740, 745
R
ELABEL-TO-FRONT, 755
relabel-to-front algorithm, 748–760
phase of, 758
relation, 1163–1166
relatively prime, 931
R
ELAX, 649
relaxation
of an edge, 648–650
linear programming, 1125

1284Index
relaxed heap, 530
relaxed red-black tree, 311 ex.
release time, 447 pr.
remainder, 54, 928
remainder instruction, 23
repeated squaring
for all-pairs shortest paths, 689–691
for raising a number to a power, 956
repeat, in pseudocode, 20
repetition factor, of a string, 1012 pr.
R
EPETITION-MAT C H E R, 1013 pr.
representative of a set, 561
R
ESET, 459 ex.
residual capacity, 716, 719
residual edge, 716
residual network, 715–719
residue, 54, 928, 982 pr.
respecting a set of edges, 626
return edge, 779
return, in pseudocode, 22
return instruction, 23
reweighting
in all-pairs shortest paths, 700–702
in single-source shortest paths, 679 pr.
rho heuristic, 976–980, 980 ex., 984
.n/-approximation algorithm, 1106, 1123
R
IGHT, 152
right child, 1178
right-conversion, 314 ex.
right horizontal ray, 1021 ex.
R
IGHT-ROTATE, 313
right rotation, 312
right spine, 333 pr.
right subtree, 1178
rod-cutting, 360–370, 390 ex.
root
of a tree, 1176
of unity, 906–907
ofZ

n
, 955
rooted tree, 1176
representation of, 246–249
root list, of a Fibonacci heap, 509
rotation
cyclic, 1012 ex.
in a red-black tree, 312–314
rotational sweep, 1030–1038
rounding, 1126
randomized, 1139
row-major order, 394
row rank, 1223
row vector, 1218
RSA public-key cryptosystem, 958–965, 983
RS-vEB tree, 557 pr.
rule of product, 1184
rule of sum, 1183
running time, 25
average-case, 28, 116
best-case, 29 ex., 49
expected, 28, 117
of a graph algorithm, 588
and multithreaded computation, 779–780
order of growth, 28
rate of growth, 28
worst-case, 27, 49
sabermetrics, 412 n.
safe edge, 626
S
AME-COMPONENT, 563
sample space, 1189
sampling, 129 ex., 179
SAT, 1079
satellite data, 147, 229
satisfiability, 1072, 1079–1081, 1105,
1123–1124, 1127 ex., 1139
satisfiable formula, 1049, 1079
satisfying assignment, 1072, 1079
saturated edge, 739
saturating push, 739, 745
scalar flow product, 714 ex.
scalar multiple, 1220
scaling
in maximum flow, 762 pr., 765
in single-source shortest paths, 679 pr.
scan, 807 pr.
S
CAN, 807 pr.
scapegoat tree, 338
schedule, 444, 1136 pr.
event-point, 1023
scheduler, for multithreaded computations,
777, 781–783, 812
centralized, 782
greedy, 782
work-stealing algorithm for, 812
scheduling, 443–446, 447 pr., 450, 1104 pr.,
1136 pr.
Schur complement, 820, 834

Index1285
Schur complement lemma, 834
S
CRAMBLE-SEARCH, 143 pr.
seam carving, 409 pr., 413
S
EARCH, 230
searching, 22 ex.
binary search, 39 ex., 799–800
in binary search trees, 289–291
in B-trees, 491–492
in chained hash tables, 258
in compact lists, 250 pr.
in direct-address tables, 254
for an exact interval, 354 ex.
in interval trees, 350–353
linear search, 22 ex.
in linked lists, 237
in open-address hash tables, 270–271
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 540–541
in red-black trees, 311
in an unsorted array, 143 pr.
in Van Emde Boas trees, 550
search tree,seebalanced search tree, binary
search tree, B-tree, exponential search
tree, interval tree, optimal binary search
tree, order-statistic tree, red-black tree,
splay tree, 2-3 tree, 2-3-4 tree
secondary clustering, 272
secondary hash table, 278
secondary storage
search tree for, 484–504
stacks on, 502 pr.
second-best minimum spanning tree, 638 pr.
secret key, 959, 962
segment,seedirected segment, line segment
S
EGMENTS-INTERSECT, 1018
S
ELECT, 220
selection, 213
of activities, 415–422, 450
and comparison sorts, 222
in expected linear time, 215–220
multithreaded, 805 ex.
in order-statistic trees, 340–341
in worst-case linear time, 220–224
selection sort, 29 ex.
selector vertex, 1093
self-loop, 1168
self-organizing list, 476 pr., 478
semiconnected graph, 621 ex.
sentinel, 31, 238–240, 309
sequence (hi)
bitonic, 682 pr.
finite, 1166
infinite, 1166
inversion in, 41 pr., 122 ex., 345 ex.
probe, 270
sequential consistency, 779, 812
serial algorithm versus parallel algorithm, 772
serialization, of a multithreaded algorithm,
774, 776
series, 108 pr., 1146–1148
strands being logically in, 778
set (
fg
), 1158–1163
cardinality (
jj
), 1161
convex, 714 ex.
difference (), 1159
independent, 1101 pr.
intersection (\), 1159
member (2), 1158
not a member (62), 1158
union ([), 1159
set-covering problem, 1117–1122, 1139
weighted, 1135 pr.
set-partition problem, 1101 ex.
shadow of a point, 1038 ex.
shared memory, 772
Shell’s sort, 42
shift, in string matching, 985
shift instruction, 24
short-circuiting operator, 22
SHORTEST-PATH, 1050
shortest paths, 7, 643–707
all-pairs, 644, 684–707
Bellman-Ford algorithm for, 651–655
with bitonic paths, 682 pr.
and breadth-first search, 597–600, 644
convergence property of, 650, 672–673
and difference constraints, 664–670
Dijkstra’s algorithm for, 658–664
in a directed acyclic graph, 655–658
in-dense graphs, 706 pr.
estimate of, 648
Floyd-Warshall algorithm for, 693–697,
700 ex., 706
Gabow’s scaling algorithm for, 679 pr.
Johnson’s algorithm for, 700–706
as a linear program, 859–860
and longest paths, 1048

1286Index
by matrix multiplication, 686–693, 706–707
and negative-weight cycles, 645, 653–654,
692 ex., 700 ex.
with negative-weight edges, 645–646
no-path property of, 650, 672
optimal substructure of, 644–645, 687,
693–694
path-relaxation property of, 650, 673
predecessor-subgraph property of, 650, 676
problem variants, 644
and relaxation, 648–650
by repeated squaring, 689–691
single-destination, 644
single-pair, 381, 644
single-source, 643–683
tree of, 647–648, 673–676
triangle inequality of, 650, 671
in an unweighted graph, 381, 597
upper-bound property of, 650, 671–672
in a weighted graph, 643
sibling, 1176
side of a polygon, 1020 ex.
signature, 960
simple cycle, 1170
simple graph, 1170
simple path, 1170
longest, 382, 1048
simple polygon, 1020 ex.
simple stencil calculation, 809 pr.
simple uniform hashing, 259
simplex, 848
S
IMPLEX, 871
simplex algorithm, 848, 864–879, 896–897
single-destination shortest paths, 644
single-pair shortest path, 381, 644
as a linear program, 859–860
single-source shortest paths, 643–683
Bellman-Ford algorithm for, 651–655
with bitonic paths, 682 pr.
and difference constraints, 664–670
Dijkstra’s algorithm for, 658–664
in a directed acyclic graph, 655–658
in-dense graphs, 706 pr.
Gabow’s scaling algorithm for, 679 pr.
as a linear program, 863 ex.
and longest paths, 1048
singleton, 1161
singly connected graph, 612 ex.
singly linked list, 236
see alsolinked list
singular matrix, 1223
singular value decomposition, 842
sink vertex, 593 ex., 709, 712
size
of an algorithm’s input, 25, 926–927,
1055–1057
of a binomial tree, 527 pr.
of a boolean combinational circuit, 1072
of a clique, 1086
of a set, 1161
of a subtree in a Fibonacci heap, 524
of a vertex cover, 1089, 1108
skip list, 338
slack, 855
slack form, 846, 854–857
uniqueness of, 876
slackness
complementary, 894 pr.
parallel, 781
slack variable, 855
slot
of a direct-access table, 254
of a hash table, 256
S
LOW-ALL-PAIRS-SHORTEST-PAT H S, 689
smoothed analysis, 897
?Socrates, 790
solution
to an abstract problem, 1054
basic, 866
to a computational problem, 6
to a concrete problem, 1055
feasible, 665, 846, 851
infeasible, 851
optimal, 851
to a system of linear equations, 814
sorted linked list, 236
see alsolinked list
sorting, 5, 16–20, 30–37, 147–212, 797–805
bubblesort, 40 pr.
bucket sort, 200–204
columnsort, 208 pr.
comparison sort, 191
counting sort, 194–197
fuzzy, 189 pr.
heapsort, 151–169
insertion sort, 12, 16–20

Index1287
k-sorting, 207 pr.
lexicographic, 304 pr.
in linear time, 194–204, 206 pr.
lower bounds for, 191–194, 211, 531
merge sort, 12, 30–37, 797–805
by oblivious compare-exchange algorithms,
208 pr.
in place, 17, 148, 206 pr.
of points by polar angle, 1020 ex.
probabilistic lower bound for, 205 pr.
quicksort, 170–190
radix sort, 197–200
selection sort, 29 ex.
Shell’s sort, 42
stable, 196
table of running times, 149
topological, 8, 612–615, 623
using a binary search tree, 299 ex.
with variable-length items, 206 pr.
0-1 sorting lemma, 208 pr.
sorting network, 811
source vertex, 594, 644, 709, 712
span law, 780
spanning tree, 439, 624
bottleneck, 640 pr.
maximum, 1137 pr.
verification of, 642
see alsominimum spanning tree
span, of a multithreaded computation, 779
sparse graph, 589
all-pairs shortest paths for, 700–705
and Prim’s algorithm, 638 pr.
sparse-hulled distribution, 1046 pr.
spawn, in pseudocode, 776–777
spawn edge, 778
speedup, 780
of a randomized multithreaded algorithm,
811 pr.
spindle, 485
spine
of a string-matching automaton, 997 fig.
of a treap, 333 pr.
splay tree, 338, 482
spline, 840 pr.
splitting
of B-tree nodes, 493–495
of 2-3-4 trees, 503 pr.
splitting summations, 1152–1154
spurious hit, 991
square matrix, 1218
S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY, 75, 689
S
QUARE-MAT R I X-MULTIPLY-RECURSIVE,
77
square of a directed graph, 593 ex.
square root, modulo a prime, 982 pr.
squaring, repeated
for all-pairs shortest paths, 689–691
for raising a number to a power, 956
stability
numerical, 813, 815, 842
of sorting algorithms, 196, 200 ex.
stack, 232–233
in Graham’s scan, 1030
implemented by queues, 236 ex.
linked-list implementation of, 240 ex.
operations analyzed by accounting method,
457–458
operations analyzed by aggregate analysis,
452–454
operations analyzed by potential method,
460–461
for procedure execution, 188 pr.
on secondary storage, 502 pr.
S
TAC K-EMPTY, 233
standard deviation, 1200
standard encoding (hi), 1057
standard form, 846, 850–854
star-shaped polygon, 1038 ex.
start state, 995
start time, 415
state of a finite automaton, 995
static graph, 562 n.
static set of keys, 277
static threading, 773
stencil, 809 pr.
stencil calculation, 809 pr.
Stirling’s approximation, 57
storage management, 151, 243–244, 245 ex.,
261 ex.
store instruction, 23
straddle, 1017
strand, 777
final, 779
independent, 789
initial, 779
logically in parallel, 778

1288Index
logically in series, 778
Strassen’s algorithm, 79–83, 111–112
multithreaded, 795–796
streaks, 135–139
strictly decreasing, 53
strictly increasing, 53
string, 985, 1184
string matching, 985–1013
based on repetition factors, 1012 pr.
by finite automata, 995–1002
with gap characters, 989 ex., 1002 ex.
Knuth-Morris-Pratt algorithm for,
1002–1013
naive algorithm for, 988–990
Rabin-Karp algorithm for, 990–995, 1013
string-matching automaton, 996–1002,
1002 ex.
strongly connected component, 1170
decomposition into, 615–621, 623
S
TRONGLY-CONNECTED-COMPONENTS, 617
strongly connected graph, 1170
subgraph, 1171
predecessor,seepredecessor subgraph
subgraph-isomorphism problem, 1100 ex.
subgroup, 943–946
subpath, 1170
subproblem graph, 367–368
subroutine
calling, 21, 23, 25 n.
executing, 25 n.
subsequence, 391
subset (), 1159, 1161
hereditary family of, 437
independent family of, 437
SUBSET-SUM, 1097
subset-sum problem
approximation algorithm for, 1128–1134,
1139
NP-completeness of, 1097–1100
with unary target, 1101 ex.
substitution method, 83–88
and recursion trees, 91–92
substring, 1184
subtract instruction, 23
subtraction of matrices, 1221
subtree, 1176
maintaining sizes of, in order-statistic trees,
343–344
success, in a Bernoulli trial, 1201
successor
in binary search trees, 291–292
in a bit vector with a superimposed binary
tree, 533
in a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 535
findingith, of a node in an order-statistic
tree, 344 ex.
in linked lists, 236
in order-statistic trees, 347 ex.
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 543–544
in red-black trees, 311
in Van Emde Boas trees, 550–551
S
UCCESSOR, 230
such that (W), 1159
suffix (), 986
suffix function, 996
suffix-function inequality, 999
suffix-function recursion lemma, 1000
sum.
P
/, 1145
Cartesian, 906 ex.
infinite, 1145
of matrices, 1220
of polynomials, 898
rule of, 1183
telescoping, 1148
S
UM-ARRAYS, 805 pr.
S
UM-ARRAYS
0
, 805 pr.
summary
in a bit vector with a superimposed tree of
constant height, 534
in proto van Emde Boas structures, 540
in van Emde Boas trees, 546
summation, 1145–1157
in asymptotic notation, 49–50, 1146
bounding, 1149–1156
formulas and properties of, 1145–1149
linearity of, 1146
summation lemma, 908
supercomputer, 772
superpolynomial time, 1048
supersink, 712
supersource, 712
surjection, 1167
SVD, 842
sweeping, 1021–1029, 1045 pr.
rotational, 1030–1038

Index1289
sweep line, 1022
sweep-line status, 1023–1024
symbol table, 253, 262, 265
symmetric difference, 763 pr.
symmetric matrix, 1220, 1222 ex., 1226 ex.
symmetric positive-definite matrix, 832–835,
842
symmetric relation, 1163
symmetry of‚-notation, 52
sync, in pseudocode, 776–777
system of difference constraints, 664–670
system of linear equations, 806 pr., 813–827,
840 pr.
T
ABLE-DELETE, 468
T
ABLE-INSERT, 464
tail
of a binomial distribution, 1208–1215
of a linked list, 236
of a queue, 234
tail recursion, 188 pr., 419
T
AIL-RECURSIVE-QUICKSORT, 188 pr.
target, 1097
Tarjan’s off-line least-common-ancestors
algorithm, 584 pr.
task, 443
Task Parallel Library, 774
task scheduling, 443–446, 448 pr., 450
tautology, 1066 ex., 1086 ex.
Taylor series, 306 pr.
telescoping series, 1148
telescoping sum, 1148
testing
of primality, 965–975, 983
of pseudoprimality, 966–968
text, in string matching, 985
thenclause, 20 n.
Theta-notation, 44–47, 64
thread, 773
Threading Building Blocks, 774
3-CNF, 1082
3-CNF-SAT, 1082
3-CNF satisfiability, 1082–1085, 1105
approximation algorithm for, 1123–1124,
1139
and 2-CNF satisfiability, 1049
3-COLOR, 1103 pr.
3-conjunctive normal form, 1082
tight constraint, 865
time,seerunning time
time domain, 898
time-memory trade-off, 365
timestamp, 603, 611 ex.
Toeplitz matrix, 921 pr.
to, in pseudocode, 20
T
OP, 1031
top-down method, for dynamic programming,
365
top of a stack, 232
topological sort, 8, 612–615, 623
in computing single-source shortest paths in
a dag, 655
T
OPOLOGICAL-SORT, 613
total order, 1165
total path length, 304 pr.
total preorder, 1165
total relation, 1165
tour
bitonic, 405 pr.
Euler, 623 pr., 1048
of a graph, 1096
track, 486
tractability, 1048
trailing pointer, 295
transition function, 995, 1001–1002, 1012 ex.
transitive closure, 697–699
and boolean matrix multiplication, 832 ex.
of dynamic graphs, 705 pr., 707
T
RANSITIVE-CLOSURE, 698
transitive relation, 1163
transitivity of asymptotic notation, 51
T
RANSPLANT, 296, 323
transpose
conjugate, 832 ex.
of a directed graph, 592 ex.
of a matrix, 1217
of a matrix, multithreaded, 792 ex.
transpose symmetry of asymptotic notation, 52
traveling-salesman problem
approximation algorithm for, 1111–1117,
1139
bitonic euclidean, 405 pr.
bottleneck, 1117 ex.
NP-completeness of, 1096–1097
with the triangle inequality, 1112–1115
without the triangle inequality, 1115–1116

1290Index
traversal of a tree, 287, 293 ex., 342, 1114
treap, 333 pr., 338
T
REAP-INSERT, 333 pr.
tree, 1173–1180
AA-trees, 338
AVL, 333 pr., 337
binary,seebinary tree
binomial, 527 pr.
bisection of, 1181 pr.
breadth-first, 594, 600
B-trees, 484–504
decision, 192–193
depth-first, 603
diameter of, 602 ex.
dynamic, 482
free, 1172–1176
full walk of, 1114
fusion, 212, 483
heap, 151–169
height-balanced, 333 pr.
height of, 1177
interval, 348–354
k-neighbor, 338
minimum spanning,seeminimum spanning
tree
optimal binary search, 397–404, 413
order-statistic, 339–345
parse, 1082
recursion, 37, 88–93
red-black,seered-black tree
rooted, 246–249, 1176
scapegoat, 338
search,seesearch tree
shortest-paths, 647–648, 673–676
spanning,seeminimum spanning tree,
spanning tree
splay, 338, 482
treap, 333 pr., 338
2-3, 337, 504
2-3-4, 489, 503 pr.
van Emde Boas, 531–560
walk of, 287, 293 ex., 342, 1114
weight-balanced trees, 338
T
REE-DELETE, 298, 299 ex., 323–324
tree edge, 601, 603, 609
T
REE-INSERT, 294, 315
T
REE-MAXIMUM, 291
T
REE-MINIMUM, 291
T
REE-PREDECESSOR, 292
T
REE-SEARCH, 290
T
REE-SUCCESSOR, 292
tree walk, 287, 293 ex., 342, 1114
trial, Bernoulli, 1201
trial division, 966
triangle inequality, 1112
for shortest paths, 650, 671
triangular matrix, 1219, 1222 ex., 1225 ex.
trichotomy, interval, 348
trichotomy property of real numbers, 52
tridiagonal linear systems, 840 pr.
tridiagonal matrix, 1219
trie (radix tree), 304 pr.
y-fast, 558 pr.
T
RIM, 1130
trimming a list, 1130
trivial divisor, 928
truth assignment, 1072, 1079
truth table, 1070
TSP, 1096
tuple, 1162
twiddle factor, 912
2-CNF-SAT, 1086 ex.
2-CNF satisfiability, 1086 ex.
and 3-CNF satisfiability, 1049
two-pass method, 571
2-3-4 heap, 529 pr.
2-3-4 tree, 489
joining, 503 pr.
splitting, 503 pr.
2-3 tree, 337, 504
unary, 1056
unbounded linear program, 851
unconditional branch instruction, 23
uncountable set, 1161
underdetermined system of linear equations,
814
underflow
of a queue, 234
of a stack, 233
undirected graph, 1168
articulation point of, 621 pr.
biconnected component of, 621 pr.
bridge of, 621 pr.
clique in, 1086
coloring of, 1103 pr., 1180 pr.

Index1291
computing a minimum spanning tree in,
624–642
converting to, from a multigraph, 593 ex.
d-regular, 736 ex.
grid, 760 pr.
hamiltonian, 1061
independent set of, 1101 pr.
matching of, 732
nonhamiltonian, 1061
vertex cover of, 1089, 1108
see alsograph
undirected version of a directed graph, 1172
uniform hashing, 271
uniform probability distribution, 1191–1192
uniform random permutation, 116, 125
union
of dynamic sets,seeuniting
of languages, 1058
of sets ([), 1159
U
NION, 505, 562
disjoint-set-forest implementation of, 571
linked-list implementation of, 565–567,
568 ex.
union by rank, 569
unique factorization of integers, 931
unit (1), 928
uniting
of Fibonacci heaps, 511–512
of heaps, 506
of linked lists, 241 ex.
of 2-3-4 heaps, 529 pr.
unit lower-triangular matrix, 1219
unit-time task, 443
unit upper-triangular matrix, 1219
unit vector, 1218
universal collection of hash functions, 265
universal hashing, 265–268
universal sink, 593 ex.
universe, 1160
of keys in van Emde Boas trees, 532
universe size, 532
unmatched vertex, 732
unsorted linked list, 236
see alsolinked list
until, in pseudocode, 20
unweighted longest simple paths, 382
unweighted shortest paths, 381
upper bound, 47
upper-bound property, 650, 671–672
upper median, 213
upper square root

"
p

, 546
upper-triangular matrix, 1219, 1225 ex.
valid shift, 985
value
of a flow, 710
of a function, 1166
objective, 847, 851
value over replacement player, 411 pr.
Vandermonde matrix, 902, 1226 pr.
van Emde Boas tree, 531–560
cluster in, 546
compared with proto van Emde Boas
structures, 547
deletion from, 554–556
insertion into, 552–554
maximum in, 550
membership in, 550
minimum in, 550
predecessor in, 551–552
with reduced space, 557 pr.
successor in, 550–551
summary in, 546
Va rŒ(variance), 1199
variable
basic, 855
entering, 867
leaving, 867
nonbasic, 855
in pseudocode, 21
random, 1196–1201
slack, 855
see alsoindicator random variable
variable-length code, 429
variance, 1199
of a binomial distribution, 1205
of a geometric distribution, 1203
VEB-EMPTY-TREE-INSERT, 553
vEB tree,seevan Emde Boas tree
VEB-TREE-DELETE, 554
VEB-TREE-INSERT, 553
VEB-TREE-MAXIMUM, 550
VEB-TREE-MEMBER, 550
VEB-TREE-MINIMUM, 550
VEB-TREE-PREDECESSOR, 552
VEB-TREE-SUCCESSOR, 551

1292Index
vector, 1218, 1222–1224
convolution of, 901
cross product of, 1016
orthonormal, 842
in the plane, 1015
Venn diagram, 1160
verification, 1061–1066
of spanning trees, 642
verification algorithm, 1063
vertex
articulation point, 621 pr.
attributes of, 592
capacity of, 714 ex.
in a graph, 1168
intermediate, 693
isolated, 1169
overflowing, 736
of a polygon, 1020 ex.
relabeled, 740
selector, 1093
vertex cover, 1089, 1108, 1124–1127, 1139
VERTEX-COVER, 1090
vertex-cover problem
approximation algorithm for, 1108–1111,
1139
NP-completeness of, 1089–1091, 1105
vertex set, 1168
violation, of an equality constraint, 865
virtual memory, 24
Viterbi algorithm, 408 pr.
VORP, 411 pr.
walk of a tree, 287, 293 ex., 342, 1114
weak duality, 880–881, 886 ex., 895 pr.
weight
of a cut, 1127 ex.
of an edge, 591
mean, 680 pr.
of a path, 643
weight-balanced tree, 338, 473 pr.
weighted bipartite matching, 530
weighted matroid, 439–442
weighted median, 225 pr.
weighted set-covering problem, 1135 pr.
weighted-union heuristic, 566
weighted vertex cover, 1124–1127, 1139
weight function
for a graph, 591
in a weighted matroid, 439
while, in pseudocode, 20
white-path theorem, 608
white vertex, 594, 603
widget, 1092
wire, 1071
W
ITNESS, 969
witness, to the compositeness of a number, 968
work law, 780
work, of a multithreaded computation, 779
work-stealing scheduling algorithm, 812
worst-case running time, 27, 49
Yen’s improvement to the Bellman-Ford
algorithm, 678 pr.
y-fast trie, 558 pr.
Young tableau, 167 pr.
Z(set of integers), 1158
Z
n
(equivalence classes modulon), 928
Z

n
(elements of multiplicative group
modulon), 941
Z
C
n
(nonzero elements ofZ
n
), 967
zero matrix, 1218
zero of a polynomial modulo a prime, 950 ex.
0-1 integer programming, 1100 ex., 1125
0-1 knapsack problem, 425, 427 ex., 1137 pr.,
1139
0-1 sorting lemma, 208 pr.
zonk, 1195 ex.