

BIOCHEMISTRY
LIPIDS
S. J. NAMAUMBO, 2024
099397184/0888613923
snamaumbo@luanar.ac.mw

LIPIDS
•A naturally occurring molecules which is soluble in nonpolar 
organic solvents
•Lipids are very diverse in structure
•They include
✓Fats and Oil
✓Waxes
✓Sterols
✓Phospholipds
The commonest are 
➢Fats
➢OIls

LIPIDS 
FATS
•Solid at room temperature
•Mixture of triacylglycerols 
that is solid because it 
contains a high proportion of 
saturated fatty acids
OILS
•Liquid at room temperature
•Mixture of triacylglycerols that 
is liquid because it contains a 
high proportion of 
unsaturated fatty acids
•Triacylglycerol in natural fast and oils are nonpolar, 
hydrophobic molecules with no ionic charges

STRUCTURE OF LIPID MOLECULE
There are two main components of fats/oil:
a straight chain of an even number of carbon 
atoms, with hydrogen atoms along the length 
of the chain and at one end of the chain and a 
carboxyl group (―COOH) at the other end
The chemical structure of 
glycerol shows thateach carbon 
atom is bonded to an -OH group
A. GlycerolsB. Fatty Acids
A trihydroxyl 
alcohol

FATTY ACIDS
•They are mostly long chain carboxylic acids with more than 10 carbons
•Naturally occurring fatty acids have even number of carbon atoms
Examples
•Lauric acid (Dodecanoic acid)
 CH
3
(CH
2
)
10
COOH
•Myristic acid (Tetradecanoic acid)
 CH
3
(CH
2
)
10
COOH
•Palmitic acid (hexadecanoic acid)
 CH
3
(CH
2
)
14
COOH
•Stearic acid (Octadecanoic acid)
 CH
3
(CH
2
)
16
COOH
•Arachidonic acid (eicosanoic acid)
 CH
3
(CH
2
)
18
COOH

Saturated and Unsaturated Fatty Acids
•Saturated Fatty Acids
•Long chain of RCOOH with only single bond
•Saturated fatty acids are often classified based 
on their carbon chain length into short-chain 
(less than 6 carbons), medium-chain (6 to 12 
carbons), long-chain (13 to 21 carbons), and 
very long-chain (more than 22 carbons) fatty 
acids.
•Common saturated fatty acids include:
✓Lauric Acid (C12): Found in coconut oil and palm kernel oil, as well as in cow’s milk and 
breast milk.
✓Myristic Acid (C14): Present in dairy products and some plant oils.
✓Palmitic Acid (C16): Commonly found in palm oil, meat, and dairy products.
✓Stearic Acid (C18): Found in meat and cocoa butter.

Saturated and Unsaturated Fatty Acids
•Unsaturated Fatty Acids
•Long chain of RCOOH with one or more carbon-
carbon double bond
•Unsaturated fatty acids are often cis isomers 
hence puts a kink in the chain structure.
cis – Oleic acid
Trans – isomers are only 
formed synthetically
trans – Oleic acid

Saturated and Unsaturated Fatty Acids
Linoleic and Linolenic acids are essential in human diet because the body 
does not synthsize them. They are needed for the synthesis of other lipids  

Glycerol Esterification
•Glycerol esterification is a chemical 
process where glycerol reacts with 
fatty acids to form glycerol esters, 
such as glycerol mono-oleate (GMO) 
and glycerol dioleate (GDO). 
•This reaction is significant in various 
industries, including food, 
cosmetics, pharmaceuticals, and 
polymers.
• The process can be catalyzed using 
different types of catalysts, with 
acid-catalyzed systems being the 
most common.

Glycerol Esterification Mechanism
•The esterification reaction involves the nucleophilic attack of the 
hydroxyl group of glycerol on the carbonyl carbon of the fatty acid.
•This leads to the formation of an ester bond and the release of water.
✓The general reaction can be represented as follows:
                  Glycerol   +  Fatty Acid  →  Glycerol Ester + Water

Glycerol Esterification Mechanism

•Triglycerides are a type of fat (lipid) 
found in your blood and are the 
most common form of fat in the 
body. 
•They are composed of three fatty 
acids linked to a glycerol molecule. 
What happens when you consume fatty food?
Are carboxylic acids triesters of 
glycerol, make up the fats stored 
in our bodies and most dietry 
fats and oils.
Animal fats and vegetable oils 
are the most plentiful lipids in 
nature. 
➢High triglyceride levels (0ver 500mg/dL) can increase the risk of cardiovascular 
diseases such as heart attacks and strokes.

TRIGLYCERIDES
•All fats and oils are composed of triesters of glycerol (1,2,3-
propanetriol, also known as glycerine) with three fatty acids. 
•They are named chemically as triacylglycerols, but are often 
called triglycerides 

TRIGLYCERIDES
The three fatty acids esterified to glycerol usually are not the same 
type
✓Fatty acid on carbon 1 is typically saturated. 
✓Fatty acid on carbon 2 is typically unsaturated. 
✓Fatty acid on carbon 3 can be either saturated or unsaturated.

TRIGLYCERIDES

TRIGLYCERIDES – Structure and Properties
✓TAG that are solid at room temperature are classified as fats 
(animal-based). 
✓TAG that are liquid at room temperature are classified as oils 
(vegetable-based).
✓In general, the more unsaturated the fatty acids in a TAG, 
the less solid it is.
✓Most liquid TAG come from plant sources (olives, corn, 
safflower). 
✓Most solid or primarily saturated fats come from animal 
sources. 
✓3-D structure of fatty acids affects packing which in turn 
affects melting point

DIGLYCERIDES
▪Diglycerides, also known as diglycerol 
esters or diacylglycerols (DAGs)
▪Type of glyceride that consists of two 
fatty acid chains attached to a glycerol 
backbone. 
▪They are formed through the process of 
esterification, where glycerol reacts with 
fatty acids. 
▪Two possible forms exist, 1,2-
diacylglycerols and 1,3-diacylglycerols.

DIGLYCERIDES
✓In food fast diglycerides are are typically found in smaller 
quantities compared to triglycerides, which are the main 
form of dietary fat.
✓The industrial production of diglycerides primarily 
involves a glycerolysis reaction between triglycerides (the 
predominant form of dietary fats) and glycerol. 
▪The glycerolysis reaction isa chemical process that uses 
glycerol to break chemical bonds and convert free fatty 
acids (FFAs) into glycerides. 
▪This process can utilize either vegetable oils or animal fats 
as raw materials.
✓Diglycerides serve as important food additives, stabilizer
❑Common applications include bakery products, beverages, ice 
cream, peanut butter, shortening, whipped toppings, 
margarine, confections, and snack foods like Pringles. 

MONOGLYCERIDES – Structure and Properties
▪Are called glycerol esters
▪Type of glyceride that consists of only one fatty acid chain 
attached to a glycerol backbone. 
▪They are formed through the process of esterification, where 
glycerol reacts with fatty acids.  
▪Two possible forms exist, 1-monoglyceride and 2-
monoglyceride.

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids
Phospholipids
•Phospholipids are a major component of all cell membranes 
as they can form lipid bilayers. 
•Most phospholipids contain a diglyceride, a phosphate 
group, and a simple organic molecule such as choline. 
•The structure of the 
phospholipid molecule 
generally consists of 
hydrophobic tails and a 
hydrophilic head. 

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids
Phospholipids: Examples
Phosphatidylcholine (PC)
Phosphatidylseline (PS)

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids
Phospholipids
•In general, phospholipids are composed of a 
phosphate group, two alcohols, and one or two 
fatty acids. 
•On one end of the molecule are the phosphate group 
and one alcohol; this end is polar, i.e., has an electric 
charge, and is attracted to water (hydrophilic). 
•The other end, which consists of the fatty acids, is 
neutral; it is hydrophobic and water-insoluble but is 
fat soluble.
•This amphipathic nature (containing both 
hydrophobic and hydrophilic groups) makes 
phospholipids important in membranes. 
•They form a two-layer structure, called the lipid 
bilayer, with the polar head facing out on each 
surface to interact with water, and with the 
neutral “tails” driven inward and pointing 
toward one another. 

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids
Phospholipids
•The lipid bilayer is the structural 
basis of all cell membranes and is 
nearly impermeable to ions and 
most polar molecules. The major 
role is as a barrier between cells 
and their environment. 
•Thus separating the cytoplasm 
and cellular structures from the 
extracellular fluid and each other. 
Proteins embedded in the 
phospholipid matrix transport 
many substances through the 
membrane.

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids
Sphingolipids
•Sphingolipids are a complex class of lipids that play crucial 
roles in cellular functions and are primarily found in the 
plasma membranes of various cell types, especially within the 
nervous system. 
•Sphingolipids are 
extremely versatile 
molecules, found in 
nerve tissue and also 
found in a few bacterial 
genera
•They are characterized by a backbone of sphingoid bases, 
which are aliphatic amino alcohols that include sphingosine. 

Phospholipids and Sphingolipids
Sphingolipids: Examples
•Sphingosine
•Ceramides 
•Sphingomyelin 
•Oligoglycosylceramides 
•Gangliosides.
•These  are Complex sphingolipids located mainly in the 
plasma membrane of mammalian cells where they have 
a structural function, and also serve as adhesion sites for 
proteins from the extracellular tissue. 
•Sphingolipids and their metabolites have important roles 
in signal transduction.

Steroids
✓Steroids form an important group of compounds 
based on the fused four saturated carbon rings 
✓Steroids comprise a group of cyclic organic 
compounds.. 
✓The most common characteristic is an 
arrangement of seventeen carbon atoms in a 
four-ring structure. 
✓There are three rings composed of 6-carbons 
(rings A, B, and C) followed by one with 5-carbons 
(ring D). 
✓They have an 8-carbon side chain attached to a 
carbon on ring D, and two or more methyl groups 
at the points where adjacent rings are "fused".

Steroids -  Examples
Cholesterol
Testosterone
Progesterone
Bile acid
Estrogen

Steroids
•Steroids are lipids because they are hydrophobic and insoluble 
in water, but they do not resemble lipids since they have a 
structure composed of four fused rings. 
•Cholesterol is the most common steroid and is the precursor 
to vitamin D, testosterone, estrogen, progesterone, 
aldosterone, cortisol, and bile salts. 
•Cholesterol is a component of the phospholipid bilayer and 
plays a role in the structure and function of membranes. 
•Steroids are found in the brain and alter electrical activity in 
the brain. Because they can tone down receptors that 
communicate messages from neurotransmitters, steroids are 
often used in anesthetic medicines.

Waxes
Definition and Composition
•Waxes are a diverse class of organic compounds 
characterized by their lipophilic (fat-loving) nature and 
malleable solid state at ambient temperatures. 
•They typically consist of long aliphatic alkyl chains, although 
aromatic compounds may also be present. 
•Waxes have melting points generally above 40 °C, 
transitioning to low viscosity liquids upon melting. 
•They are insoluble in water but soluble in nonpolar organic 
solvents such as hexane, benzene, and chloroform.
Waxes typically includes long-chain hydrocarbons with various 
functional groups such as fatty acids, alcohols, ketones, 
aldehydes, and esters. The presence or absence of these 
functional groups can affect the physical properties of the wax.

Types of waxes
Waxes can be categorized into natural and synthetic types:
Natural Waxes
These are produced by plants and animals. The composition of natural 
waxes varies significantly depending on the species and geographic 
location.
Animal Waxes: A well-known example is 
beeswax, which is primarily composed of 
myricyl palmitate, an ester formed from 
triacontanol and palmitic acid. Other animal-
derived waxes include spermaceti from sperm 
whales and lanolin from sheep wool.
Plant Waxes: Plants secrete waxes onto their 
surfaces to control evaporation and hydration. 
Carnauba wax, derived from the leaves of the 
Brazilian palm Copernicia prunifera, is one of 
the most commercially significant plant waxes.

Properties of waxes
•Melting Point and Congealing Point: 
The melting point is critical for determining how a wax behaves under 
different temperature conditions. The congealing point indicates the 
temperature at which a liquid wax begins to solidify.
•Solubility Characteristics: 
Waxes are generally insoluble in water due to their hydrophobic nature 
but can dissolve in nonpolar solvents.
•Food Industry: Used for coatings on fruits and vegetables to 
enhance shelf life; paraffin wax is commonly used in food 
packaging.
•Cosmetics and Personal Care Products: Beeswax is frequently 
used in lip balms, creams, and lotions due to its emollient 
properties.
•Candles and Polishes: Paraffin wax is widely utilized in candle 
making; carnauba wax is used in furniture polish for its high gloss 
finish.
•Industrial Uses: Waxes serve as lubricants, waterproofing agents, 
and coatings for various materials.
Application of waxes

BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANES
❖Structure and function of membrane
❖Movement of Ions and molecules 
across membrane
❖Transport of macromolecules



BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANE
•Plasma membrane defines the periphery of the cell, separating its 
contents from the surroundings. 
•All cells are bounded by a plasma membrane; 
•have a cytosol containing metabolites, 
•coenzymes, 
•inorganic ions, 
•and enzymes; 
•and have a set of genes contained within a nucleoid (prokaryotes) or nucleus 
(eukaryotes).
•Prokaryotes are those cells without nuclear envelopes while eukaryotes 
are those with nuclear envelope
•These are barriers which give cells their outer boundaries and their outer 
compartments (organelles)
•Biological membrane also called bio-membrane is an enclosing or 
separating membrane acts as a selectively permeable barrier within 
living things 
•Plasma Membrane is a boundary that separates the living cell from its 
non-living surroundings.

STRUCTURE OF MEMBRANE

STRUCTURE OF MEMBRANE

COMMON ATTRIBUTES OF BIOLOGICAL 
MEMBRANE
There 7 general attribute of the Biological Membrane
1.Bi-layer, sheet-like structures.
2.Made up of lipids, Proteins and Carbohydrates
3.Membrane lipids are amphipathic
4.Have specific Proteins
5.Non-covalent cooperative interactions
6.Inside – Outside asymmetry
7.Membranes are fluids 

a. Bi-layer, sheet-like structure
•Membrane are bi – layer sheet like structures, closed 
boundaries of cells or organelles
• They have two polar heads (inside and outside) and non-
polar region

b. Made of Lipids, Proteins and CHO
•Biological membrane are made of three major 
components: 
•Lipids, Proteins and Sugar

c. They are Amphipathic
•Amphipathic is a molecule 
having both hydrophilic  
(heads) and hydrophobic 
(tails) parts 
Phospholipid
An Amphiphile is a chemical compound possessing 
both hydrophilic and lipophilic. 
Membrane have Phospholipids which are 
amphipathic
Have polar phosphate and non-polar fatty acids

c. They are Amphipathic...contd
•One of the tails is a straight chain fatty 
acid (saturated). 
•The other has a kink in the tail because 
of a cis double bond (unsaturated).
•This kink influences packing and 
movement in the lateral plane of the 
membrane
The presence of the cis 
double bond prevents tight 
packing and makes the 
bilayer difficult to freeze.

c. They are Amphipathic...contd

d. Have specific Proteins
•Membrane have specific proteins which serves as 
•pumps, 
•channels, 
•receptors, 
•energy transducers and 
•enzymes

e. Non – covalent cooperative 
       interactions
•Membrane have Lipids, Proteins and CHOs 
that are held together by several non 
covalent cooperative interactions

f. Inside – outside asymmetry
•Membrane have an ‘inside-outside 
asymmetry’
•The inside and outside surfaces of biological 
membranes are always different
•Example 
•CHOs are only outside
•Specific enzymes are either outside/inside 
•Membrane potential = Inside: negative (-60mV) etc

g. Membranes are fluids
•The lipid bilayer gives the 
membranes its fluid 
characteristics. 
•At low temperatures, the bilayer 
is in a gel state and tightly 
packed. 
•At higher (body) temperatures, 
the bilayer actually "melts' and 
the interior is fluid allowing the 
lipid molecules to move around, 
rotate, exchange places.
•This also allows movement of other components of the 
membrane.

KEY TERMS

Structure of Biological Membrane
•All membrane have common structure in which two – layered 
sheets of lipids molecules have proteins embedded in them. 
(Polar Heads and Non polar region)
•The structure is highly fluid and most of the lipid and protein 
molecules can move about in the plane of the membrane
•The lipid and protein and protein molecules are held together 
mainly by non-covalent interactions
•Sugars are attached by the covalent bonds to some lipid and 
proteins molecules
•They are found on one side of the membrane only (outer 
surface)

FUNCTIONS OF MEMBRANES
•Protection
•Communication
•Selectively allow 
substances in 
•Respond to environment
•Recognition
The Membrane contains molecules other than phospholipids, 
primarily other lipids and proteins
•The plasma membranes also contain certain types of proteins. 
•Amembrane proteinis a proteinmoleculethat is attached to, or 
associated with, the membrane of a cell or an organelle.
•Membrane proteins can be put into two groups based on how 
the protein is associated with the membrane.

Functions of the Plasma Membrane 
Proteins
These include
a. Transport
b. Enzymes
c.  Receptors
d. Signal Transducers
e.  Cell adhesion
f.  Support

PERMEABILITY OF THE MEMBRANE

PERMEABILITY OF THE MEMBRANE
Ions and molecules 
move across 
membrane through:
✓Diffusion transport
✓Active Transport
✓Ionic gated channels

DIFFUSION TRANSPORT
•Diffusion is the tendency of 
molecules to spread into an 
available space.
• This tendency is a result of 
the intrinsic thermal energy 
(heat) found in all 
molecules at temperatures 
above absolute zero. 
•Without other outside forces at work, substances will 
move/diffuse from a more concentrated environment to a 
less concentrated environment. 
•No work is performed for this to happen, as diffusion is a 
spontaneous process.

Movement of ions and molecules: DIFFUSION 
TRANSPORT
•Also called Facilitated transport or Passive transport 
depending on type.
•Two Types:
1. Facilitated Diffusion: Carrier mediated, very fast
2. Passive Diffusion: Not carrier mediated, very 
slow

Movement of ions and molecules: DIFFUSION 
TRANSPORT

DIFFUSION EXPLAINED
•TERMS
•Tonicity = Concentration of solution as compared 
to another. 
•Describe the amount of solutes dissolved by a solution
•Hypertonic: More solute concentration (water 
move into the solution)
•Hypotonic: Less solute concentration (Water 
move out of the solution) 
•Isotonic: Equal solute Concentration (No net 
movement of water from/to the solution)

ACTIVE TRANSPORT
•Active transport is the movement of 
molecules across a cell membrane from a 
region of their lower concentration to a 
region of their higher concentration—in 
the direction against some gradient or 
other obstructing factor (often a 
concentration gradient) with the 
utilization of metabolic energy (ATPs).
•This type of transport is grouped into two 
types
•Primary active transport
•Secondary active transport

Movement of Ions and Molecules across 
membrane: Active Transport
•Primary active transport (called direct active transport) 
•Directly use metabolic/chemical energy (ATP) to transport molecules across a 
membrane against concentration gradient.
•ie a carrier protein uses energy directly from ATP through hydrolysis
•Transport of charged particles require ion pumps (Channels)Primary 
active transport (called direct active transport) 
•Ion pumps are the only molecules capable of performing primary 
active transport.
•All ion pumps contain one or more binding sites for ATP
Na
+
, K
+
, Mg
2+
and Ca
2+
 transported by 
Primary active transport.
Sodium-potassium pump and calcium 
pump are the best

Movement of Ions and Molecules across 
membrane: Active Transport
•Secondary active transport (coupled transport or co-transport), 
transport molecules across membrane utilizing energy in other 
forms other than ATM
•there is no direct coupling of ATP; instead it depends upon the 
electrochemical potential difference created by pumping ions in/out of 
the cell.
•ie a carrier protein uses energy stored in the concentration gradients of ions
Sodium –glucose transport 
uses sodium ion gradient 
created by Na
+
/K
+
 ATPase 
pump to transport glucose 
across the membrane

Movement of Ions and Molecules across 
membrane: Active Transport
•Membrane Transporters: Can be classified in to three depending 
on whether the substance move in the same or opp. directions
We have:
A Symport: 
Two species of 
ions or other 
solutes are 
pumped in the 
same direction 
across a 
membrane
An Antiport: Two 
species of ions or 
other solutes are 
pumped in opposite 
direction across a 
membrane
In Uniport, 
only one 
species of ions 
or other 
solutes is  
transported. 
(A case in 
facilitated 
diffusion)

SUMMARY ACTIVE TRANSPORT

SUMMARY TRANSPORT
https://upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/thumb/4/40/Scheme_secundary_active_transport-en.svg/220px-Scheme_secundary_active_transport-en.svg.png

Movement of Ions and Molecules across 
membrane: Active Transport

TRANSPORT TECHNIQUES

Ionic and gated Channels
•Ionic channels are integral membrane proteins that facilitate 
the movement of ions across cell membranes. 
•They play a crucial role in various physiological processes, 
including the generation and propagation of electrical signals in 
neurons and muscle cells. 
•These channels can be classified based on their gating 
mechanisms, which determine when they open or close to 
allow ion flow.
Types of Ionic Channels
1.Voltage-Gated Ion Channels
2.Ligand-Gated Ion Channels
3.Mechanically Gated Ion Channels
4.Leak Channels

Voltage gated Channels
✓These channels open or close in response to changes in membrane 
potential. 
✓They are essential for the initiation and propagation of action 
potentials in neurons. 
✓For example, voltage-gated sodium (Na+) channels open when the membrane 
depolarizes, allowing Na+ ions to enter the cell, which further depolarizes the 
membrane.

Ligand-gated ion Channels
➢Also known as ligand-gated ion channels (LICs), these channels open in 
response to the binding of a specific chemical messenger (ligand), such 
as a neurotransmitter. 
➢When a ligand binds to its receptor site on the channel, it induces a 
conformational change that opens the channel, allowing ions like Na+, 
K+, Ca2+, or Cl− to flow through. 
➢This mechanism is critical for synaptic transmission in neurons.
Ions channels receptors(1) opens when the ligands (3) 
binds to them and this allow ions (2) to pass

Mechanically gated ion Channels
•These channels respond to mechanical forces such as stretch or 
pressure applied to the cell membrane. 
•They are important in sensory systems, such as touch and 
hearing.

Leak Channels
Leak Channels: These are 
non-gated ion channels 
that remain open under 
resting conditions, allowing 
ions to move across the 
membrane according to 
their concentration 
gradients. They help 
maintain resting 
membrane potential.



TRANSPORT OF MACROMOLECULES
•Macromolecule is a molecule containing a very large number 
of atoms, such as protein, nucleic acid or synthetic polymers
•Examples: biopolymers (nucleic acids, proteins, 
carbohydrates, polyphenols) and large non-polymeric 
molecules (lipids and macrocycles)
•Mechanical transport of substance like macromolecules, large 
liquid droplets and particular matter cannot occur through 
the unbroken plasma membrane. 
•They are transported through the membrane bound vesicles 
and is called vesicular transport

Membrane Transport for Macromolecules
•Exocytosisandendocytosisare the two forms of vesicular 
transport.
•These two do transport larger molecules such as proteins 
and polysaccharides and even large particles

Membrane Transport for Macromolecules
Exocytosis:
•It involves the expulsion of a substance which gets enclosed 
in membrane bound vesicle calledexocytic vesicle. 
•It fuses with the plasma membraneand releases its contents 
outside the cell.
•Synthetic and secretory materials are passed out of the cell in 
this way

Membrane Transport for Macromolecules
Endocytosis:
•It is the uptake of macromolecules from the extracellular 
space into the cell across the plasma membrane via the 
formation of an intracellular vesicle pinching off from the 
plasma membrane.
•Endocytosis can be divided into three distinct types 
depending on the size of the ingested macromolecule and 
whether specific cell surface receptors are involved. 
•These three processes 
arephagocytosis,pinocytosisandreceptormediatedendocyt
osis.

TYPES of ENDOCYTOSIS
1. Phagocytosis: (Cellular eating)
•It is the bulk transport of solid food 
materials into cell.  
•It involves folding of theplasma 
membranearound the substance forming 
an intracellular vesicle calledphagosome 
or phagocytic vesicle
•In protozoa, phagocytosis is a form of feeding, where the 
ingested material is broken down in the lysosomes and utilized 
as food.
•Macrophagesandneutrophils(WBC) use phagocytosis to 
protect the organism against infection by ingesting invading 
microorganisms.

Phagocytosis

TYPES of ENDOCYTOSIS
2. Pinocytosis: (Cellular eating)
•It is the process of intake of fluid 
material into the cell.
•During the process the cell 
membrane folds to form small 
vesicles calledpinocytic vesicles or 
pinosomes in which small drops of 
fluid materials are taken into the cell.
•The plasma folds inward to form a 
channel allowing dissolved substances to 
enter the cell
•The liquid encircled within a pinocytic 
vesicle

TYPES of ENDOCYTOSIS

TYPES of ENDOCYTOSIS
3. Receptormediatedendocytosis:
•It is the selective uptake of extracellular macromolecules through 
their binding to the specific cell surface receptors.
•The receptor- macromolecule complex then accumulates inclathrin 
coated pits and is endocytosed via clathrin-coated vesicle.
•In this chemical binds receptor protein before being brought into the 
cell eg Cholesterol, is carried by LDL

Summary on the three Endocytosis processes

NEXT = PROTEINS