

GEOPHYSICS
(NGEP 33105): 
TECTONICSON A SPHERE
HERBERT JAMES BANDA
Basic Science Department
Lilongwe University Of Agriculture And 
Natural Resources (LUANAR)
1
TOPIC

ROTATION VECTORS AND ROTATION POLES
•To describe motions on the surface of a sphere we use Euler’s ‘fixed-
point’ theorem, which states that :
•‘The most general displacement of a rigid body with a fixed point is 
equivalent to a rotation about an axis through that fixed point.’
•OR
•A change in position can be described by rotation about an axis.
•Taking a plate as a rigid body and the centre of the Earth as a fixed point, 
we can restate this theorem: 
•‘Every displacement from one position to another on the surface of the Earth 
can be regarded as a rotation about a suitably chosen axis passing through the 
centre of the Earth.’

ROTATION VECTORS AND ROTATION POLES
•The ‘suitably chosen axis’ which passes through 
the centre of the Earth is called the rotation 
axis.
•It cuts the surface of the Earth at two points 
called the poles of rotation (Fig. 2.8(a)). 
•These are purely mathematical points and have 
no physical reality.
•The positions describe the directions of motion 
of all points along the plate boundary. 
•The magnitude of the angular velocity about 
the axis defines the magnitude of the relative 
motion between the two plates. 

ROTATION VECTORS AND ROTATION POLES
•Angular velocities behave as vectors.
•The relative motion between two plates can be 
written as 흎, a vector directed along the rotation 
axis.
•The magnitude of 흎 is 휔, the angular velocity.
•The sign convention used is that a rotation that is 
clockwise (or right-handed) when viewed from the 
centre of the Earth along the rotation axis is positive. 
•Viewed from outside the Earth, a positive rotation is 
anticlockwise. 
•Thus, one rotation pole is positive and the other is 
negative (Fig. 2.8(b)).

ROTATION VECTORS AND ROTATION POLES
•Consider a point X on the surface of the Earth 
(Fig. 2.8(c)).
• At X the value of the relative velocity v 
between the two plates is
  풗=흎푹퐬퐢퐧휽 (2.3)
•where 휃 is the angular distance between the 
rotation pole P and the point X, and R is the 
radius of the Earth. 
•This factor of sin 휃 means that the relative 
motion between two adjacent plates changes 
with position along the plate boundary.

ROTATION VECTORS AND ROTATION POLES
•Consider a point X on the surface of the Earth 
(Fig. 2.8(c)).
•Thus, the relative velocity is zero at the rotation 
poles, where θ = 0◦ and 180◦.
•It  has a maximum value of ωR at 90◦ from the 
rotation poles. 
•If by chance the plate boundary passes through the 
rotation pole, the nature of the boundary changes 
from divergent to convergent, or vice versa (as in 
Fig. 2.8(b)). 
•Lines of constant velocity (defined by θ = constant) 
are small circles about the rotation poles.

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
Determination of rotation poles and rotation vectors
1.A local determination of the direction of relative motion between two 
plates can be made from the strike of active transform faults. 
•Methods of recognizing transform faults are discussed fully in Section 8.5. 
•Transform faults on ridges are much easier to recognize and more common 
than transform faults along destructive boundaries.
•This method is used primarily to find rotation poles for plates on either 
side of a midocean ridge. 
•The relative motion at transform faults is parallel to the fault and is of 
constant value along the fault.
•This means that the faults are arcs of small circles about the rotation pole. 
•The rotation pole must therefore lie somewhere on the great circle which is 
perpendicular to that small circle. 
•So, if two or more transform faults can be used, the intersection of the great 
circles is the position of the rotation pole (Fig. 2.9).

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
Determination of rotation poles and rotation vectors
2.The spreading rate along a constructive plate boundary changes as the sine 
of the angular distance θ from the rotation pole (Eq. (2.3)). 
•So, if the spreading rate at various locations along the ridge can be determined (from 
spacing of oceanic magnetic anomalies , the rotation pole and angular velocity can 
then be estimated.
3.The analysis of data from an earthquake can give the direction of motion 
and the plane of the fault on which the earthquake occurred. 
 This is known as a fault-plane  solution or a focal mechanism.
• Fault-plane solutions for earthquakes along a plate boundary can give the 
direction of relative motion between the two plates. 
•For example, earthquakes occurring on the transform fault between plates A 
and B in Fig. 2.8(b) would indicate that there is right lateral motion across 
the fault.
•The location of the pole and the direction, though not the magnitude, of the 
motion can be estimated.

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
Determination of rotation poles and rotation vectors
4.Where plate boundaries cross land, surveys of displacements can be used 
(over large distances and long periods of time) to determine the local 
relative motion.
• For example, stream channels and even roads, field boundaries and 
buildings may be displaced.
5.Satellites have made it possible to measure instantaneous plate motions 
with some accuracy. 
•One method uses a satellite laser-ranging system (SLR) to determine 
differences in distance between two sites on the Earth’s surface over a 
period of years.
• Another method, very-long-baseline interferometry (VLBI), uses quasars for 
the signal source and terrestrial radio telescopes as the receivers. 
•Again, the difference in distance between two telescope sites is measured 
over a period of years. 
•Worldwide, the rates of plate motion determined by VLBI and SLR agree 
with geologically determined rates to within 2%.

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
Determination of rotation poles and rotation vectors
6.A third method of measuring plate motions utilizes the Global Positioning 
System (GPS) which was developed to provide real-time navigation and 
positioning using satellites. 
•A worldwide network of GPS receivers with a precision suitable for 
geodynamics has been established (1 cm in positioning and <10
−3
 arcsec in 
pole-position estimates).
•It is called the International GPS Service for Geodynamics (IGS), and is a 
permanent global network of receivers.
• Analysis of data from 1991–1996 shows that the agreement of GPS velocities 
with the geologically determined velocities for all but a few locations is to 
better than 95% confidence. 
•This is another impressive corroboration of relative plate motions – the 
plates are continually in motion.

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
•An estimate of the present-day plate motions, NUVEL-1A, made by using 277 
measurements of ridge spreading rate, 121 oceanic transform-fault azimuths 
and 724 earthquake slip vectors is given in Table 2.1. 

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
•Figure 2.10 shows velocities in southern California relative to North America as 
determined from geodetic measurements (including GPS and VLBI) between 
1972 and 1995. 

PRESENT-DAY PLATE MOTIONS
•The measured velocity of motion across this boundary was 50 mm 푦
−1
, 
compared with the 49 mm 푦
−1
 predicted (Table 2.1). 
•Thus, again geological estimates based on measurements with a timescale of a 
million years agree with measurements made over a few years.

SYMBOLS USED IN C ALCULATIONS INVOLVING ROTATION POLES

C ALCULATIONS INVOLVING POLES
•Although clear boundaries between rigid plates describe the relative motions 
and structures well, there are a few boundaries for which the term ‘diffuse 
plate boundary’ is appropriate (spread out over a wide region). 
•The main examples are the North American and South American plate 
boundary from the Mid-Atlantic Ridge to the Caribbean and the boundary 
which subdivides the Indian plate.
•It is important to realize that a rotation with a large angular velocity ω does 
not necessarily mean that the relative motion along the plate boundary is also 
large.

THE RELATIVE POSITIONS  OF THE POSITIVE ROTATION 
•A diagram showing the relative positions of the 
positive rotation pole P and point X on the plate 
boundary.
•N is the North Pole. 
•The sides of the spherical triangle NPX are all great 
circles, the sides NX and NP are lines of geographic 
longitude. 
•The vector v is the relative velocity at point X on 
the plate boundary (note that v is perpendicular to 
PX). 
•It is usual to quote the lengths of the sides of 
spherical triangles as angles (e.g., latitude and 
longitude when used as geographic coordinates).

THE RELATIVE POSITIONS  OF THE POSITIVE ROTATION 
•The distance between rotation pole and 
plate boundary is important (remember 
the sin θ factor multiplying the angular 
velocity ω in Eq. (2.3)).
•However, it is conventional to use the 
relative velocity at θ = 90◦ when quoting 
a relative velocity for two plates, even 
though neither plate may extend 90◦ 
from the pole.

RELATIVE MOTION AT A PLATE BOUNDARY
•Once the instantaneous rotation pole and angular 
velocity for a pair of adjacent plates have been 
determined :
•they can be used to calculate the direction and 
magnitude of the relative motion at any point along 
the plate boundary.
•The notation and sign conventions used in the 
following pages are given in Table 2.2. 
•Figure 2.11 shows the relative positions of the 
North Pole N, positive rotation pole P and point 
X on the plate boundary (compare with Fig. 
2.8(b)).
•In the spherical triangle NPX, let the angles 
෣
푋푁푃 
= A, 
෣
푁푃푋 = B and 
෣
푃푋푁 = C,
Figure 2.11

RELATIVE MOTION AT A PLATE BOUNDARY

RELATIVE MOTION AT A PLATE BOUNDARY

RELATIVE MOTION AT A PLATE BOUNDARY

RELATIVE MOTION AT A PLATE BOUNDARY

COMBINATION OF ROTATION VECTORS
•Suppose that there are three rigid plates A, B and C and that the 
angular velocity of A relative to B, 
퐵
.
휔
퐴
 , and that of B relative to C, 
퐶
.
휔
퐵
, are known. 
•The motion of plate A relative to plate C, 
퐶
.
휔
퐴
, can be determined 
by vector addition just as for the flat Earth: