

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Mike Ching’amba 
Lecturer -Sustainable Agriculture 

 
INTRODUCTION 
Origin of Cultivated Plants  
 
•All cultivated crops came from wild species.  
•They were introduced to new areas by migrating 
human populations. 
•Alphonse de Candolle(1882) engaged in an elaborate 
task of tracing the origin of the cultivated plants.  
•In his publication of 1882 (Origin des plantes cultivees) 
de Candolle concluded that in areas or regions where a 
species is abundant is not necessarily the centre of its 
origin 
 

 
According to de Candolle , agriculture came 
originally from three great regions namely; 
China 
The vast region which stretches from Ganges to 
Armenia  and the Nile (South-West Asia and Egypt) 
Tropical America (the highlands of Mexico & Peru) 
Then came Nicolai Ivanovic Vavilov (1926) 
concluded that a centre of crop origin is 
characterized by dominant alleles. 
Vavilov noted that in the periphery of the centre, 
there is an increased frequency of recessive alleles 
but decreased genetic diversity. 
 

 
1.Botanical 
 It looks at the morphological similarities of plant 
parts.  
It is a more useful classification when relating plants to 
their climatic conditions for growth. 
2.Economical  
This is largely based on the plant usage.  
Depending on usage, certain crops may belong to 
more than one category 
 
 
Classification of crops 

 
Examples of Economic classification 
1.Cereal/grain: belong to the grass family (Graminaea),they 
are grown for their  edible seeds e.g. rice, wheat, barley, 
maize. 
 
1.Grain Legumes: belong to the family leguminosae. Also 
grown for their edible seeds  e.g. cowpeas, groundnuts, 
Field peas. 
2.Root and tuber crops: grown for their enlarged roots or 
tubers e.g. cassava, sweet  potatoes, yams,  
3.Fibre crops: grown for fibre e.g. jute,cotton, hemp, and 
sisal 
4.Sugar crops: grown for table sugar e.g. sugarcane and 
sugar beets. 
5.Drug crops: these crops are smoked or chewed for 
stimulating effect e.g. tobacco and bhang (Cannabis sativa) 
6.Beverage crops- grown for stimulation e.g. tea, coffee and 
cocoa 
 
 

 
Cultivar Selection and  Crop Development 
The success of agronomic crop production in various 
agro-ecological zones depends on the availability of plant 
varieties and hybrids specifically adapted to local 
production conditions.  
Cultivar selection and development is therefore key in 
ensuring improved crop yields since such cultivars: 
 provide resistance to major pests and diseases,  
produce acceptable yield and quality, and  
have appropriate agronomic characteristics that are 
compatible with production systems. 

 
 
At research level, activities in this regard should always focus 
at a wide range of crop improvement such as: 
 
Fundamental genetic studies.  
Identifying genes of agronomic importance. 
Screening genetic stocks for breeding material that 
carry the desired traits.  
Breeding and selection of lines as potential new 
cultivars for release to growers. 
 
 

 
However, for improved yields, the first step in managing 
crops is to look at a crop as an individual and as a 
community. 
This is so because crop growth and production depend on 
several factors i.e. Genetic constitution (variety) and 
Climate in which the plant grows (Environmental 
conditions).  
Climate is briefly defined as the aggregate of all the 
external conditions and its influence affects the life and 
development of organisms.  
It has an influence on the natural vegetation, the 
characteristics of the soil, type of crops to be grown and 
the farming system to be practised in any region. 
 

 
 
 
The phenomenon can best be illustrated as follows: 
 
 
P
(yield)
  =  (G + E). 
 
Where:  P  =  Production (crop yield) 
G   =  Genotype (crop variety) 
E      =  Environment (management practices) 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Concept of limiting factors 
The climate of any particular region is composed of a 
great variety of elements.  
 
Such elements will determine crop adaptability and as 
such, they are often regarded as limiting factors to growth 
and development of any plant.  
 
The concept of limiting factors therefore states that:   
 
If Growth, Development and Yield of any plant depend on so 
many factors, then that Growth, Development and Yield will be 
limited by the factor in the minimum. (Depend on least quantity 
factor). 
 

 
1.Rainfall; 
Rainfall normally influences agriculture in the tropics 
since it helps in determining the type of crop to be grown, 
farming system, sequence and timing of operations.  
The rainfall is not only defined in terms of total amount 
of rainfall per annum but rather:  
its seasonal distribution,  
variability,  
reliability within and between seasons,  
its intensity,  
rate of infiltration into the soil and  
the balance between rainfall and evapotranspiration (ET).  
 
Common Limiting factors 

 
 
In Malawi, the main source of moisture is rainfall.  
This rainfall ranges from 600- 3000mm/yr. However only 
30% of this is regarded as effective rainfall (for plant 
use). 
Effective Rainfall is the minimum amount of rainfall 
occurring on a single occasion which assures of some 
moisture storage under favourable soil conditions.  
Such rainfall ranges from 15-20mm per single occasion. 
However this is often affected by distribution and as such 
there is need to supplement moisture through irrigation.   
 
 

 
2.  Humidity 
Humidity is the water vapour in the air. Relative 
Humidity (RH) is the vapour pressure in the air as 
percentage necessary to saturate that atmosphere at a 
particular temperature.  
A saturated atmosphere that causes fog, dew or rain has a 
theoretical RH of about 100%  
Humidity becomes a limiting factor when Relative 
Humidity is equal to RH in the Ambient which then 
creates retards the transpiration stream.  
This may result in no net movement of nutrients and 
water hence no photosynthesis.  
Photosynthesis would only be possible if the leaves are 
receiving lower temperatures than the atmosphere to 
ensure continuous water flow within the plant body as 
demanded by photosynthesis.   
 

 
3. Temperature  
Individual crop either of temperate or tropical origin has 
its optimal temperature for its normal growth and 
development.  
In most cases plants do not experience their optimum 
temperatures per se but rather their ability to respond to 
fluctuating temperatures (Thermoperiodism) enables them 
to conduct important physiological  processes such as: 
 germination,  
serminogation (stem elongation & flowering), and  
fruit formation. 
 

 
For all crops there are three temperature regimes at which 
growth stops and where growth is optimum.   
The values are called cardinal temperatures.   
These include minimum, maximum and optimum cardinal 
temperatures.   
These cardinal temperatures are different for different 
crops, especially temperate, tropical and sub-tropical 
crops. 
Temperature is considered as a limiting factor since: 
It accelerates growth  
It controls rate of respiration and photosynthesis 
It affects  flowering, pollen viability and fruit setting 
It influences maturity, senescence and ripening 
It affects harvesting time for some crops e.g. cowpeas 
(morning) 
It improves sweetness in some crops e.g. water melons 
 

 
In summary, Temperature influences dry matter production 
in plants.  
According to Van Hoff’s Law, he calculated that for every 
10
0
C rise in temperature the rate of growth or dry matter 
production doubles.   
This is valid only in the range of temperature between 5 to 
35
0
C depending on the plant or organism.  This is also 
termed as the Q10.   
Temperature therefore becomes a limiting factor since plant 
growth depends on the total amount of heat to which that 
plant is subjected during its life time commonly referred to 
as Degree Days.  
 
 
 

 
This is  an amount of energy that a plant must accumulate 
for it to mature. The unit is called degree days.  This is 
calculated by minimum threshold temperature from the 
average daily temperature.  This is calculated as follows: 
 
Heat units   =       (Temp.
max
 + Temp
min
) – Threshold Temp. 
2 
These degree days are summed up for the desired period usually 
from planting to harvest. The minimum threshold temperatures 
(base temperature) vary with crops.   
For temperate crops this would be calculated as follows: assume 
maximum was 27 and minimum was 15 for a given day.  The 
number of degree days would be (27+15)/2=42/2=21-10=11 
degree days 
 
 

 
i.Colour  
 soil colour  will determine the amount of light to be absorbed which  
 will eventually reach out the plant roots thereby making them active 
 for  nutrients uptake. Mostly dark soils absorb more heat as opposed 
 to red brown soils. 
 
ii.Soil texture 
 if the soil is well aerated, it allows more heat to be transferred  down 
 the soil 
 
iii. Slope 
•configuration and position of the slope will determine the amount of 
sun light getting down the soil. It is important to change the 
cropping  pattern and ridge alignment in order to capture as much 
light as possible. 
 
 
Soil Temperature 
 (what affects soil temperature?) 

 
It is important to take note of different light duration 
required by different plants.  Such light durations 
categorize plants as below:  
 
Long day plants- these require a minimum of 13hours 
of day light. Days have to be longer to facilitate 
flowering. Very common in temperate areas. 
Short day plants- they require a maximum of 12hours 
of day light. Days should be shorter than night. 
Common in tropical areas.  
Day-Neutral plants- these do not respond to either long 
or short days but are in between. 
 
4.  Light duration 

 
Referred to as movement of the air normally 
originates either over the oceans or deserts.  
In summer, the desert region becomes heated and 
the heated air rises causing an in draught of winds 
from neighboring regions.  
During winter, the desert areas are cooler than 
adjacent areas and the wind blows from the desert. 
5.  Wind 

 
PROS CONS 
moderate wind which enhances 
photosynthesis by continuously 
replacing CO2 absorbed by leaf 
surface 
Crop losses e.g Grain shuttering 
Heavy sands carried by the wind 
may cause erosion through scouring 
Induce Evapotranspiration 
hot dry winds affect photosynthesis 
by making the stomata to close up 
Pros and Cons of wind  

 
Tillage  
By definition, Tillage is the manipulation of the soil 
into a desired condition for plant establishment and 
growth.  
It is done by mechanical means where tools are 
employed to achieve some desired effect  such as: 
cutting,  
moving and  
pulverizing.  
It is also defined as the agricultural preparation of the soil 
by mechanical agitation of various types, such as digging, 
stirring, and overturning.  
 
LAND PREPARATION SYSTEMS. 

 
The Role of Tillage  
Tillage is normally done as a way of changing soil 
structure, kill weeds or managing the crop residues 
Soil-structure modification is often necessary to 
facilitate the intake, storage, and transmission of 
water and to provide a good environment for seeds 
and roots.  
By contrast however, fine-textured soils form clods; 
these require breakage into smaller units by 
weathering or by machines.  
If too wet or too dry, the power requirements for 
shattering dry clods or cutting wet ones are 
prohibitive when using tillage alone. Thus, the 
farmer usually attempts tillage of such soils only 
after a slow rain has moistened the clods and made 
them friable. 
 

 
Types of Tillage. 
1. Primary tillage 
Primary tillage is the first soil tillage after the last 
harvest.  
It is normally conducted when the soil is wet enough 
to allow plowing and strong enough to give 
reasonable levels of traction.  
This can be immediately after the crop harvest or at 
the beginning of the next wet season.  
When there is sufficient power available some soil 
types are ploughed dry 
 

 
 
The objectives of primary tillage are: 
to attain a reasonable depth (10-15 cm) of soft soil with 
varying clod sizes. 
kill weeds by burying or cutting and exposing the 
roots. 
soil aeration and water accumulation; depending on 
the soil type and the plough the soil will normally be 
inverted aerating the deep layers and trapping water 
during a rainfall event 
chop and incorporate crop residues. 
 

 
 
In primary tillage Equipment used to break and 
loosen soil for a depth of 15 to 90 centimeters are 
referred to as primary tillage equipment.  
These include: 
Moldboard plough,  
Disk plough,  
Rotary plough,  
Chisel plough, and  
subsoil ploughs. 
 

 
 
2
 
 
 
3 
5 
1 
4 
Some functional parts of a Mouldboard plough 
carves out ground paving a way to disc and cultivate 
the garden 
Provides versatility for narrow wilder furrows. 
For accurate vertical furrow cuts 
provides long lasting durability for the toughest soil 
cutting 
For maximum convenient and expedient ploughing 

 
Primary Tillage 
with Disc 
Plough 

 
Primary Tillage 
with Rotary 
Plough 

 
Primary Tillage 
with Chisel 
Plough 

 
Primary Tillage 
with Mouldboard 
Plough 

 
2.  Secondary tillage 
Secondary tillage is any working completed after 
primary tillage and is undertaken for 
reducing clod size, 
weed control, 
incorporation of fertilizers, 
Puddling (rice fields)  and 
leveling soil surface. 
Secondary workings are usually shallower and less 
aggressive than primary tillage.  
In the animal powered system, the second working is 
normally undertaken with the moldboard plough 
when the field is fully saturated. 

 
Secondary tillage tools include various types of: 
harrows,  
rollers,   
Pulverizers and  
tools for mulching and fallowing. 
Disc Harrow 

 
Secondary 
Tillage using 
Disc Harrow 

 
Secondary Tillage 
using Rotavators 

 
Secondary Tillage 
with Spike 
Harrow 

 
Secondary 
Tillage with 
Rollers 

 
Plant population is the number of plants per unit 
area in the field. This is mainly in reference to the 
crop stand in the field. 
  
PLANT POPULATIONS AND SEEDRATES 

 
Plant population   =      A x S x R   =  plants /ha 
            RS x HS 
  
 
 
  Where A = plot Area 
   S = Number of Seeds/station 
   R = Number of Rows/ridge 
   RS = Ridge Spacing 
   HS = Hill Spacing (spacing between planting stations 

 
Example: A = 1 hectare. (10,000m
2
) 
  S = 1 seed per station 
  R = 1 row per ridge 
  RS = 75cm (0.75m) 
  HS = 25cm (0.25m) 
  
Plant pp = 10,000m
2
  x  1 seed/station x  1 row    
         0.75m   x  0.25m 
  = 53, 333 plants/ha. 
 

 
Seedrate  
This is referred to as quantity of seed to be planted per unit 
area.  The seeds to be planted can be small, large or in some 
cases the seed could refer to vegetative propagules such as 
cassava cuttings. Just like plant population, seedrate too is 
determined by a formula below.  
 
SR =                     Plant Population per unit area  
       No. seed/ unit weight (g) x   Germination %  x  Purity % x (1000g/kg) 
 
 

 
For example, the maize crop above, given: 
Plant population  = 53, 333 plants/hectare 
Seed weight for 100 seeds = 50g 
Germination    = 95% 
Purity   = 99% 
 
SR  =  53, 333 plants/ha 
  100seeds/50g   x   95%   x 99% x 1000g/kg 
  
   = 28.35 kg/ha 
 
   = 29 kg/ha 
 Approximately = 30 Kg/ha 
  
* By increasing the planting density (75cm by 25cm) the farmer will need 
approximately 30 kg of the maize seed per a unit hectare of land. 

 
 
 
1.Plant population  -determines crop yield will also affect 
the amount of seed to be used per unit land area. 
2.Seed viability- this is referred to as the ability of seed to 
germinate. Where the viability is low, seedrate increases 
and vice versa. For example, maize with 95% viability 
has a seedrate range of about 22-25kg per hectare. 
3.Seed size - this is in reference to the actual weight of 
seed. For large seeded plants like maize, seed weight is 
expressed in grammes per 100 seeds while for small 
seeded plants i.e. mustard, the expression is done in 
grammes per 1000 seeds  
 
Factors Affecting Seed-Rate 

 
4. Method of planting- where planting is done by 
broadcasting, seed rate is high due to wastage as 
opposed to direct placement (drilling). 
 
5. Crop variety- crop varieties which show 
characteristics of  high vigourness in growth have low 
seed rates than weak varieties 
6. Time of planting- where timely planting is followed, 
the recommended seed rate can be followed than where 
there is a delay in planting as this results in raising up 
seed rate since crop failure is eminent . 
7. Seedbed quality- where land preparation is done 
thoroughly with a fine tilth, average seed rate is used 
but for rough seed beds there  is need to increase seed 
rate to take care of any germination failures. 
 

 
MAIZE PRODUCTION 
 
PLANT PRODUCTION 

 
Introduction 
Maize (corn) is the main staple food in Malawi and is 
also an important grain crop worldwide. It ranks 
second following Rice in the world production of 
cereal crops. In many countries maize has almost 
replaced traditionally grown cereals such as 
sorghum and millet. The reason being that: 
it gives one of the highest yields per unit area 
it provides nutrients in a compact form 
its husks give maximum protection against birds and 
rain 
It is easily harvested and does not shatter 
it can be harvested over a long period 
it stores well if properly dried and treated 
 

 
 
 
Origin 
There are a number of theories regarding the origin of 
maize but it is said to have originated in either South 
or Central America because this area is considered to 
be the home of teosinte grass (Euchlaena mexicana) 
which is a near relative of maize (Jugenheimer, 1958). 
It was spread to North America, Asia and eventually 
Africa through traders. 
 

 
Utilization 
Maize is prepared and consumed in a number of 
ways but most of them can be grouped as follows: 
ground or pounded and boiled (Nsima) 
ground or pounded and baked or fried 
(chikondamoyo/Chipotahayi) 
boiled whole (chongowe/dowe) 
roasted whole (chokazinga/dowe) 
fermented (chimera) 
 

 
The maize grain contains mainly carbohydrate 
including some significant amount of protein, oil as 
well as small amount of minerals. The oil is found 
mainly in the germ (embryo) and the aleurone layer 
of the endosperm where much of the protein occurs 
as well. The composition of the maize grain is 
approximately: 
76-88% carbohydrate 
6-15% protein  
4-5.7% fat 
1.3% minerals 
 

 
National policy 
Maize nutritionally provides about 80% of the much 
needed carbohydrates in Malawi. And since the country‟s 
population is still rising (approximately 3.6 per annum) 
so is the demand for maize which must increase at a 
much higher rate than the population itself.  
The national policy therefore is to increase production 
per unit area from the present  
•2,000 – 3,000kg/ha. for hybrids to more than  6,500kg/ha 
•1,400 – 2,400kg/ha for composites to more than  4,500kg  
This can be done through improved cultural practices. 
This will ensure that the nation is able to: 
Sustain food self sufficiency 
Build up grain reserves for use in bad seasons 
Release some land currently underutilised in maize to 
other enterprises i.e. cash crops and livestock.  
 

 
Botanical characteristics 
 
Roots 
 
At germination stage, maize seed develops into 3-4 
seminal roots. Later on fibrous adventitious  roots 
develop which are used for water and nutrient 
absorption from the soil and also to support (anchor) 
the plant.  
Prop or aerial (brace) roots which are special 
adventitious roots develop at a very late stage and 
these develop above ground for anchorage and in rare 
cases for photosynthesis and nutrient absorption.   
 

 
 
Stem 
 
The stem is normally straight and non-branching. It 
ranges in height from 0.6-4.5m and in diameter from 
1.4-5.0cm.  
The stem usually consists of 8-21 nodes with a leaf 
developing at each internode.  
Under excessive nutrients, maize tillers. These tillers 
have significant effect on yield and should be 
ignored. 
 

 
 
 
Leaves: 
Maize leaves are elongated and narrow with parallel 
veins.  
They are alternately arranged and they themselves to 
a stem through a sheath.  
The number of leaves ranges from 8-44. And typical 
leaf may be 80cm long and 9-10cm wide.  
At the base of the leaf, the two edges extend to form 
two auricles.  
The leaf often tapers down to a point at the tip. 
 

 
 
Flowers: 
  
Maize flowers are monoecious (both male and 
female flower parts are present on the same plant but 
borne on different sections of the plant).  
The male flower (Tassel) is located at the tip of the 
plant and appears first. It sheds pollen for about a 
week.  
The female flower (ear or cob) is ready to receive 
pollen through the silk when the tassel sheds off 
pollen.  
This natural arrangement encourages cross-
pollination and maize is 95% cross-pollinated. 
 

 
 
Fruit: 
The maize fruit is the cob. Most varieties produce 
one cob per plant and each cob bears several rows of 
kernels (the rows are always of even number) 
normally 8-18 rows with large seeded varieties 
having fewer rows than small seeded varieties. 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
Seed (kernel): 
 
Maize is monocotyledonous and one of the major 
ways of its classification is on the basis of the kernel 
(caryopsis) characteristics.  
Below are some of the common characteristics: 
 

 
Maize Class       Features                        Use 
 
Pod corn (Zea mays tunicata) Primitive form. Each seed in bract   -----breeding  
 
Waxy corn (Zea mays ceratina)     Glossy and high starch content  - Starch extraction 
 
Flour corn (Zea mays amylaccea)  looks like flint corn but of larger size -For flour
        
Pop corn (Zea mays everata)      Small, outer hard endosperm with - Chimanga pops 
              Interior soft endosperm which 
              Explodes when heated 
 
Sweet corn (Zea mays saccharata) Glossy, transluscent endosperm  -As a vegetable  
    Containing monosacharides. 
    Wrinkled when dry. Sweet taste 
 

 
 
 
Dent corn (Zea mays indentata)       Soft central endosperm up to tip            for food  
             of kernel with hard  
             endosperm on sides i.e. 
              MH12, 18, NSCM 41, 91 The Tip sinks in when 
       dry (dent) 
   
 
Flint corn (Zea mays indurata)  hard endosperm all round the seed         food i.e.  
     With smaller soft endosperm in centre  
   cultivars  of this type have  Good storability and  
   poundability 
                    cultivars  of this type have Good like17& 18 local,  
       composits 
        
   
     

 
Environmental Requirements 
Maize has a remarkable adaptability to wide range of 
environmental conditions worldwide and it is mostly 
grown in the latitude 50
0
N to 40
0
S of equator.   
However, in Malawi, best yields are achieved under the 
following environment conditions. 
Altitude: In Malawi maize grows best below 1,800m 
above sea level. Areas higher than this will expose 
maize to a lot of pest problems. 
Temperature: the minimum germination temperature 
for maize is 10
0
C but optimum temperature for 
maximum growth is 21-30
0
C. 
Rainfall: Total precipitation: depending on variety 
maize grows best in areas with annual totals of 600-
1000mm in the tropics. 
  
 
 

 
Agronomical practices 
 
Land preparation  
For conventional farming, prepare the land as soon as rains 
have stopped or after harvesting the previous crop (i.e. 
around May).  
Plough the land to 30cm deep to facilitate complete organic 
decomposition and to enhance aeration. Ridging should 
follow but where ridges are available, make new ridges in 
the farrows of the previous ones. 
Ridge spacing: the recommended spacing for maize 
ridges is 90cm and 75 cm apart  and should be aligned 
on the contour following the marker ridge for soil 
conservation purposes.  

 
In conservation agriculture, ridging may not be 
necessary, however, plant spacing can still be prepared at 
75cm between rows and 25cm between plant station (by 
planting a single seed per station).  
Seed prearation  
Since seed is very expensive, it is recommended that high 
potential varieties are used in the next growing season. 
Several companies and organizations have taken greater 
initiative in providing these improved maize varieties 
either as selling agents or breeders or indeed both.  
Such companies/organizations include; Monsanto Malawi, 
ATC, Pannar Seed, Farmers Organization, Farmers World, 
SEEDCO, ADMARC and many more  
 

 
Planting  
Time: 
Time of planting is a critical factor affecting maize yields. 
Under rainfed, maize should be planted with the first 
rains so that the plant utilizes the “Nitrogen flush” 
available in the soil. Any delay in planting for about 2-3 
weeks, it may result in yield reduction of up to 25% due 
to the following reasons: 
Seed germination potential is at its highest when the 
balance between well aerated and warm soil is achieved 
at the start of the season. Later into the wet season, the 
soil becomes cooler and aeration is reduced because of 
the increased moisture content. 
 
 

 
Weeding 
Types of weeding. 
Physical:-weeds are commonly removed using a 
handle-hoe by small scale farmers. Ox-drawn or 
tractor drawn cultivators are often used by large scale 
farmers and estates. However, hand weeding is very 
effective especially in light weeding and in very wet 
conditions. Maize weeding can be done 2 to 3 times 
during the entire growth growing period. 
Chemical:- There are herbicides (weed killers) 
available on the market. Roundup, Harness and Bullet 
are the commonly used herbicides for maize. Roundup 
kills actively growing weeds while bullet and atrazine 
as well as Harness kills the weed seeds 
 
 
 

 
Control of Witchweed (Striga asiatica)  
 

 
This weed is commonly known as Kaufiti because of 
its destructive effects to maize plant. Maize roots are 
deprived of nutrients and water thereby leading to 
wilting and death of the maize plant as a whole.  
The following methods can help to control the effects of 
witchweeed 
Plant early so that by the time the witchweed seeds 
germinate, maize will have developed and attained good 
growth 
Uproot the plant as it appears (although it have done the 
damage already in that season) 
Practice crop rotation to ensure starvation to the weed in 
that season 
Apply sufficient organic manure to suppress the effect of 
witchweed on maize yield. 
 

 
Use of trap crops- These are plants which stimulate 
the germination of the parasites seeds but do not serve 
as a host plant.  In this way, crops reduce the seed 
bank in the soil and cause a decrease in infestation. 
The following crops have a potential use as trap crops: 
cotton, soybeans, groundnuts, bambara nuts, cowpeas, 
and pigeon peas. 
Use of catch crops- Catch crops are host plants such as 
maize, sorghum, and millet which induce heavy 
germination and which get attacked by witch weed. 
They are harvested or ploughed-down after 6-8 weeks 
before the parasites emerge and reproduce few seeds.  
In this way, catch crops reduce very efficiently the 
striga seed bank in the soil. Sorghum on the other 
hand releases toxic elements (allelochemicals) capable 
of killing striga roots. 
 

 
 
Banking  
This is an operation which aims at rebuilding the crop 
ridge to avoid loss of nutrients and exposure of plant 
roots to the outside environment.  
Banking should be done soon after top-dressing the 
maize crop.  
Banking in very wet condition should be discourage as 
it results in cementing the soil creating insufficient 
aeration.  
In termite prone areas, banking should be done before 
the plant reaches knee high and soils should not be 
put close to the base of the plant.      
 

 
Manure and Fertilizer Application 
Maize is a heavy feeder in as far as nutrients uptake is 
concerned. For normal growth and high yields it needs; 
Nitrogen, Phosphorus and Potassium 
 
Organic Manure 
Includes both fresh and highly decomposed crop 
residues and animal excretions. Application of organic 
manure is important in maize production because:- 
─It helps to build up soil structure  resulting in improved 
water holding capacity, infiltration and permeability. 
─Regulates soil temperature 
─Increase the availability of nutrients (N,P,K and S),since  
the manure is decomposed matter  of e.g maize stalk, 
tree leaves 
 

 
Amount of manure to be applied depends on both soil 
type and nutrient status. In practice, however, 12.5 tonnes 
per hectare is recommended. 
Three methods are common used to apply manure i.e 
Dollop – apply a double handful at each planting station 
Banding – apply in the farrow of the previous (old) ridges 
and then ridge over. Apply at least 1.5-2kg per 2 metre ridge 
Broad casting – spread evenly over the land before ploughing 
at the rate of 1.5 kg/m2. 
To ensure complete decomposition for maximum effect, 
manure must be applied at least 4 weeks before expected 
planting dates. 
 

 
 
Inorganic manure (fertilizer) 
 
 
The amount of fertilizer to be applied depends on two 
factors; 
1.The projected maize yield that appears attainable in that 
area. 
2.The fertility level of the soil as determined by soil tests 
e.g nitrogen soil test. 
Fertilizers have a much higher ratio of the required 
elements like Nitrogen than organic manure. 
 

 
Types of Fertilizers 
Basal Dressing fertilizers 
─Applied at planting or soon after germination. They are 
phosphotic in nature (they supply P).  
─When applied at planting, place fertilizer at the base of 
hill then cover  about 2-3cm before placing seed (as in 
Sasakawa planting method).  
─But when applied after emergence, place fertilizer in 
dollops which are made 10cm away from the base of a 
plant and 10cm deep. 
Top Dressing fertilizers 
─These fertilizers are essentially carriers of Nitrogen to 
facilitate vegetative growth and fruiting. They should be 
applied 2-4 weeks after basal dressing or seedling 
emergence or when the maize reaches 45-65cm high 
(below knee height). They include Calcium Ammonium 
Nitrate (C.A.N), Urea and Sulphate of Ammonia (S/A).  
 
 

 
Fertilizer types Hybrid variety  Composite variety Local variety 
 
23:21:0+4s 200 100 100 
Urea  175 150 75 
CAN 200 200 150 
S/A 200 200 150 
Amount of fertilizer to be applied 
Note: 23: 21: 0 + 4S =  23% N 
 Urea  = 46% N 
 C.A.N  = 26-28%N 
 S/A  = 21% N & 26%S. 

 
Stalk-borer or stem-borer (Busseola fusca) 
The adult is a moth which lays eggs into funnel of a young 
plant and later  on  hatch into a larva. The larva feeds on the 
growing points, hence preventing growth. Also it feeds on 
the cob. 
In a well developed plant the larva do not prevent growth, 
but at a later stage attacks the ear 
Control measures 
oearly planting 
oAll infected plants and plant residues should be destroyed 
opractice crop rotation 
oin excessive attack spray Dipterex 2.5% right into the funnel of 
the maize plant at knee-high. (8kg/ha is required). 
 
 
Pest control in maize 

 
Army worm (Spodotera exampta) 
the adult insect is also a moth whose eggs hatch into larva 
which feed on maize  leaves.  
It is referred to as army worm because they attack in large 
numbers. Its infestation is serious under dry conditions. 
 It is recommended as a precaution that there should be 
frequent forecasting  about the pest and conduct on  
ongoing training for agricultural staff on identification, 
reporting and control of army worm, to  all agricultural 
centres and institutions   
Control is by spraying Carbaryl 85% WP (Sevin) dissolved 
in 14 litres of water. 
 
 

 
 Red locust (Nomadaeris spp) 
This is a brick red grasshopper. They always move in large 
numbers. They form  clouds and are migratory in nature 
capable of crossing international boundaries. 
Control is done by an International body called Red 
Locust Control Service (RLCS) based in Zambia. This 
monitors the movements of red locusts in the  whole 
southern part of Africa. 
 Maize weevil (Sitophilus spp) 
This is a post-harvest(after harvest) insect which eats 
stored maize grain. It is more destructive  on dent maize. 
Control is by dusting maize with Actellic Super dust at the 
rate of  40g per 90kg bag. For larger scale spray Actellic 
E.C at 10mls per 10litre of  water. 
 
 

 
Termites (Chiswe) 
These are area specific. In certain areas they tend to be 
very critical than in others.  
They attack maize stalks causing lodging. Fallen cobs 
are also attacked in the process. 
To reduce the damage, banking should be done when 
the plants are still young  and remove all the fallen 
stalks 
 Rodents e.g rats 
very common in storage.  
It is important that storage containers should be 
rodent  proof  
 

 
 
Disease control In Maize 
 
There are several diseases of maize but non of them 
is of economic importance (non of them causes 
serious damage) to warrant use of expensive 
chemicals as a control measure.  
However these diseases are serious when the 
humidity is high. 
 
 

 
 Leaf blight  
 
caused by a fungus called Helminthosporium turcicum. 
It is not usually seen before tasselling.  
There boat-shaped, greyish lesions on the infected 
spots. The lower leaves are infected first and those 
heavily infected may eventually die. 
The severity of the damage depends on the stage of the 
plant at which it appears. The younger the plant, the 
greater  will be reduction in yield. 
Control is by use of  improved certified seed. At a larger 
spray of some fungicides might be necessary. 
  

 
 Rust 
Maize is susceptible to several rust diseases but the 
most common one is called Puccinia sorghi.  
It is characterised by the appearance of brown to black 
powdery pustules on both sides of the leaves. The 
spores are often carried by the wind. 
 There is no serious damage to the crop but should be 
controlled by planting resistant varieties. 
Early sowing is necessary because late sowing causes 
severe rust. 
 

 
 Smut  
it is attacked by two types of smut : 
oCommon smut caused by fungus Ustilago maydis 
oHead smut caused by Sphacelotheca reiliana. 
Smut is first seen as greyish lump but when the 
fungus spores are mature, it turns black and releases 
the spores as it bursts open.  
The disease may attack every part of the plant above 
ground i.e stalk, leaves, tassel and ear.  
This is more prevalent in drought conditions or where 
there are many barren stalks. Most hybrids are 
resistant to this disease. 
  

 
 Ear rot 
It is a very common and destructive disease.  
The spores are wind borne and are trapped between 
the husks of the ear.  
When moisture conditions are favorable, they 
penetrate into the  developing ear on which greyish-
white mould develops.  
The rot starts at the base of the ear  and progresses 
towards the tip.  
Early infection may result in complete destruction of 
the ear. Can be controlled by  rotation and seed 
treatment . 
 
 

 
When maize is mature, the cob turns into a 
brown/khaki colour and in some varieties the dry 
cob drops down.  
If the harvesting is delayed beyond this then losses 
occur due to insect and bird attack. 
There is physiological maturity which is shown by 
the development on the black layer at the point of 
attachment of the grain to the cob. At this point 
moisture content is about 30%.  
However the required moisture content for maize 
storage is 10-12% 
In tropical Africa small scale farmers harvest 
manually 
 
Harvesting of maize 

 
1.Stooking  
This involves cutting the plants at the base and leaning 
them against each other  for further drying. This has 
an advantage of : 
i.Allowing the farmer to plough and prepare his garden 
early. 
ii.Checking the stalk-borer from hibernating in the 
standing or lying stover 
iii.Reducing the risks of termites and rodents from 
destroying the crop. The smaller the stooks the much 
easier it becomes to check any damage to it. C.  

 
  
2.Stripping  
This involves detaching the cob from the rest of the plant. 
The maize can be put in storage (Nkhokwe) and can stay 
for a longer period if treated by Actellic EC.  
3.Shelling 
This is the process of removing the grain from the cob. 
The ratio between the weight of grains to that of the cob is 
referred to as Shelling Percentage 
  
 Shelling % =  
 
 
Recommended Shelling percentage is often between    70 – 80%. 
Shelling percentage assist in estimating value of grain 
although it can be done with unshelled maize. It is also a 
good indicator of variety quality since the higher the 
shelling % the superior the variety. 
 

 
4.Storage  
Once maize is shelled, it can be put in a sack and it is 
treated with Actellic  dust i.e. 40 g per 90 kg bag. It can 
also be stored as cobs in the silo(nkhokwe) but the  floor of 
the silo (nkhokwe) should be treated with Actellic Gold 
dust and do the same to every layer of the cobs up until 
the nkhokwe is full.  
The silo (nkhokwe) should have rat- guards as well e.g 
rat traps. 
When maize is properly managed from the beginning up 
to harvesting and storage, high yields can be realised as 
outlined in the table below; 
 

 
 
 
 
The End 

 
RICE PRODUCTION 

 
Botanical  name: 
Genus:  Oryzae 
Species: sativa and glaberrime 
 
Introduction: 
Rice is a semi- aquatic crop and as such, it can either be 
rain-fed or irrigated for optimum results.  
However, in Malawi, over 80% of the crop is cultivated 
under rain-fed.  
It is estimated that half the world's population lives 
wholly or partially on rice.  
90% percent of the world crop is grown and consumed 
in Asia.  
In Malawi, rice is the second most important cereal 
food crop.  Grown in low altitude areas (e.g. the Lakeshore 
and Lake Chirwa plains, and in the Shire Valley) 

 
Utilization 
Rice is the only major cereal crop that is primarily 
consumed by humans directly as harvested.  
Brown rice has a greater food value than white, since 
the outer brown coatings contain the proteins and 
minerals.  
The white endosperm is chiefly carbohydrate.  
As food, rice is low in fat and protein as compared to 
other cereal grains.  
 

 
White Rice Brown Rice 

 
National Aims 
The national aim is to increase both irrigated and 
rain-fed rice to meet the domestic and export 
demand.  
The present production: 
rain-fed rice:  i.e. Faya is in the range of 1000 -
1500kg/ha. This should be improved to 3500kg/ha. 
irrigated rice i.e Senga, current production is around 
4000kg/ha and Changu is 2000kg/ha. There is need to 
improve production of these two cultivars as well 
towards potential levels of 6000kg/ha and 4000kg/ha 
respectively. 
 

 
Origin: 
There are about 25 species of rice but only two  
 (O. sativa and O. glaberrime) are commonly cultivated. 
 
Oryzae glaberrime is known as of African type since it 
originated around Niger. O. barthii is the progenotype 
of glaberrime. 
 
Oryzae sativa is said to have been domesticated in 
India and Thailand as early as 400 BC. O. perennis is a 
progenotype of sativa. 
 

 
Eco-geographical Rice Species 
With diverse cultivation of a rice crop, two major 
races of O. sativa have evolved around centuries and 
these are; Sub spp. Indica and  Sub spp. Japonica.  
Sub-spp. Indica. 
Commonly cultivated in warm and humid climate 
Grown in poor and flooded soils 
Tall cultivars which tend to lodge easily 
Are photoperiodic test standing (flowers at specific 
calendar period) 
Low response to N- levels 
Easily separate when cooked. 
Grains are of  about 9mm long 
 

 
 
Sub-spp. Japonica 
 
Have cultivars both sensitive and insensitive to 
photoperiod 
High response to N- levels 
Stay vegetative for a long period of time 
Have grains of less than 7mm long 
 

 
Rice Types in relation to Water Management 
Up-land (Dry Paddy) rice  
-Usually grown like any other cereal (no need for standing 
water) 
-It is generally referred to as dry-paddy rice 
-Produces very poor quality rice. 
Low-land (Wet-paddy) rice 
-Grown in standing waters of 5-10cm 
-Bunds (levees) are constructed all around the plot to 
capture water for a  long period 
-Very good quality rice is produced 
Deep water (Floating) rice 
-Adapted where water is so deep 
-Commonly grown around deltas, oceans where water 
control is a problem i.e Cambodia and Thailand 
 

 
Rice Type in Relation to Grain Characteristics 
Soft rice 
-contains a lot of amylase (dextrin) protein 
-it is glutinous and opaque 
-chocky appearance of the broken grain 
-cooked rice is sticky 
-commonly liked those who eat with a chop-stick. 
-usually used for porridge, cakes and or confectionery 
Hard rice 
-contains 75% amylopectin and 25% amylase 
-it is non-glutinous and translucent. 
-has glossy structure 
-not sticky when cooked  
 

 
Growth stages of rice 
 

 
Active Vegetative phase 
-increased tillering due to presence of Nitrogen   
-increased above ground biomass 
-increased plant weight 
-requires enough supply of N (1.7% of DM should be N 
of dry-weight) 
Vegetative Lack phase 
-is a phase between maximum  tillering to panicle show 
out 
-increased plant weight and height but reduced tiller 
weight 
-length of this phase is determined by variety type. 
 

 
 
Ripening (flowering –maturity) phase 
 
-in short photoperiodic varieties it takes: 
 125-130 days -when under rain fed and  
158 days when irrigated (winter) e.g Blue bonnet.  
-in long duration photoperiodic , maturity goes up to 
150days i.e Faya. 
-growth at this phase can be defined in respect to 
appearance of the panicle and number of days taken for 
the initiation of that panicle.  
 

 
Morphological characteristics in yielding cultivars 
 
 

 
Leaf 
-Thick ,short and erect for easy capture of light for 
photosynthesis. 
-Photosynthesis plays a bigger role since rice require 
more deposition of CHO about 78%-80% CHO is laid out 
during photosynthesis 
Culm/Stem 
-Short and stiff culm to prevent lodging . It is also 
recommended not to excessively add 
-Nitrogen which causes stems to be weak and prone to 
lodging effect. 
 

 
Tiller  
-Should be upright and compact   
-Should have high tillering capacity and of early tillering 
-It should permit fast leaf area development. 
 
Panicle  
High ripening percentage at high N levels. This 
promotes high quantities of starch to be stored in the 
grain which will determine the Harvesting Index (HI). 
Average panicle  bears 100-150kernals 
 

 
Environmental Requirements     
Temperature 
The crop requires a moderate temperature range of 20-
30
o
C .  
At seedling stage it is recommended that temperatures 
should be 25-30
o
C. To improve tillering up to 31%. 
During anthesis (panicle show-up) and ripening, 
temperatures should still be maintained at be 25-30
o
C 
Rice grown in Winter under irrigation, suffers a lot from 
cold temperatures which  tend to prolong maturity. 
 
Latitude and Altitude 
This crop grows best within the latitude of 50
o
 N and 50
o
  
of Equator.  
It also does much better within the altitude range of 0-
200m above the sea level.  
 

 
Rainfall 
The average rainfall of between 800-1000mm per 
annum is adequate for the crop.  
For optimum production, rainfall of about 1500-
2000mm is essential.  
It is advisable to construct levees where rainfall is 
inadequate. 
Variability in rainfall onset affects transplanting while 
early or late ceasation of rain will affect maturity of 
the crop 
Soil 
Rice can grow on a wide range of soils.  
However heavy soils are recommended since such 
soils tend to have high water retention particularly 
where flooding is done and also to avoid leaching 
down of phosphorus, potassium, and calcium. 
 

 
Land Preparation 
Land to be ploughed when the soil is still workable 
i.e. soon after last crop is harvested (for irrigated 
crop) or after the rains for a rain fed crop. However, 
labour size and implements  to be used will 
determine the potential in rice production 
The field should be made flat and levelled for even 
water distribution  
Where levees (bunds) are to be constructed, water inlets 
and outlets have to be properly sited to ensure efficient 
and sufficient water supply and distribution within the 
plot. 
 
 
 
Field Management 
 

 
Flat Paddy field 

 
 
Sowing : 
In Malawi, the optimum planting dates for a rain fed 
crop are mid-December to mid-January when 
temperatures are still medium. 
For an irrigated crop, sowing is done mid-June to 
mid-July. 
However for the irrigated crop, sowing can 
sometimes be done in good time but there can be a  
delay in transplanting up until there is some 
favourable conditions. 
 

 
Rice Nursery- open fields 

 
Rice nursery-nprotected  cultivation 

 
Prepare flat nursery beds measuring 20m by 1m and 
should be 5cm high.  
Twenty beds of this nature are capable of producing 
seedlings enough for a hectare of land (10, 000m
2
). 
Sowing on the nursery is by broadcasting. However 
if sown directly in the field, sow 6 seeds per station 
spaced at 23cm by 23cm. 
 
Transplanting 
Transplant seedlings after 15-20days of sowing and 
plant 2-3 seedlings per station. For direct sowing, 
thinning should be done after 20 days and leave 3-4 
seedlings per station. 
Seed-rate for rain-fed crop is 63kg per hectare while 
for that of the irrigated crop is 75kg per hectare 
 

 
Manual Planting in Philippines 

 
Manual Planting in Japan 

 
Mechanical Planting in Japan 

 
Weeds and Weed Control  
Aquatic weeds reduce efficiency in terms of planting, 
harvesting as well as irrigation.  
The most prevalent weed in Malawi and other 
tropical countries is Nadanga (Echnochloa crusgalli) 
and Eichhornia crassipes (Namasupuni) 
Flooding as weed control mechanism 
In a paddy field with concentrated flooding weed 
growth is supressed. 
However, flooding may improve or hamper soil 
nutrients depending on the soil type.  
In irrigated rice, flooding helps in ensuring that 
Nitrogen loss due to denitrification is minimised. 
flooding helps in chemo-effect reduction of minerals like 
Mgn, Fe, and organic acids i.e. Sulphide and Methine. 
These are toxic in nature and do affect root development 
and nutrient absorption. 
 

 
Eichhornia crassipes (Namasupuni) 

 
Echinochloa crusgalli - Nadanga 

 
Fertilizer application 
It is recommended that varieties that are susceptible 
to lodging should not have much nitrogen. 
 
For basal dressing, apply 100Kg of 23:21:0+4S in 
combination with 10Kg S/A per hectare at the time of 
transplanting or two-three weeks after emergency of 
the directly sown seed. 
 
Top dress using Ammonium Nitrate or UREA  about 
two-three weeks after the first application. At times 
application of Hydrogen Sulphide (H2S) is 
recommended to protect the crop from the effects of 
high levels of Zinc (Zn) and Manganeze (Mgn). 
 

 
VARIETIES    
 
1.Faya 14-M-69 
Faya is a tall (130-140 cm) leafy rice variety with thick 
and weak culms.   
It was introduced into Malawi by the Arabs more than 
a hundred years ago.   
It tillers very profusely under favourable conditions 
and easily lodges even with good management levels. 
If planted at the onset of the rains, the variety matures 
in about 150-155 days around mid April or mid June. 
Under irrigated conditions, yields range between 
3,000-5,000 kg/ha, whereas under rain-fed conditions, 
yields range between 1,000-3,500 kg/ha.  
 It is glutinous when cooked, and has a low amylase 
content of 19%.   
 

 
2.Blue Bonnet 
Blue Bonnet originated from the United States of 
America (USA) and it was introduced into Malawi in the 
late 1960‟s and has been grown since then.   
It does well in all low-lying dambo areas, which have 
moderate standing water levels (less than 30 cm) during 
the growing period.  
It has low tillering capacity, averaging 7 tillers per plant, 
and lodges easily under high soil fertility conditions.  
matures in 125-130 days.    It is a moderate yielder, 
averaging about 2,000 kg/ha, but with yields varying 
between 1,500 and 4,000 kg/ha depending on 
management practices. 
This variety is highly acceptable on the export market 
because of its long grain size and its translucency when 
milled.   
 

 
 
3.Senga (IET 4094) 
This is an Indian variety introduced into Malawi in 
1977 through the International Rice Research 
Institute (IRRI), in Philippines.   
It is a short maturing variety; 116 days in the wet 
season and 143 days in the dry season.   
The average plant height is 78 cm, with a high yield 
potential of 5,500 kg/ha in the wet season, and 6,000 
kg/ha in the dry season. 
 
 

 
 
4. Changu (IR 1561-250-2-2) 
 
This variety that was originally developed at IRRI and 
introduced into Malawi in 1975.   
This is a short to medium maturing variety;  
o119 days in the wet season, and  
o145 days in the dry season. 
Has an average plant height of 76 cm.   
 
It has a yield potential of 5,000 kg/ha during the wet 
season, and 6,000 kg/ha in the dry season 

 
5.Vyawo 
Vyawo, is the Tonga language, translates into „theirs‟.   
This name refers to the variety‟s resistance to rice blast 
and particularly to its adaptability to the Nkhata Bay 
low altitude areas.   
This variety is not scented, but its long grain has good 
flavour.   
The variety takes 130 days to mature in the wet season 
and 150 days in the dry season.   
It is also suitable for double cropping if sown before 
15
th
 June.   
It is suited for production in all irrigation schemes and 
has grain yield potential of 6,000 kg/ha in the wet 
season and 5,500 kg/in the dry season. 
 

 
6. Mtupatupa 
 
The name Mtupatupa means expanding in the chi 
Chewa language, referring to the variety‟s grain that 
expands when cooked.   
The variety is intermediate in height (110-120 cm) with 
medium shaped grains that are moderately scented.   
It matures in 130 days in the wet season and 155 days 
in the dry season.   
It is suited for production in all irrigation schemes, 
mainly because of its tolerance to rice disease.   
It has a yield potential of 6,300 kg/ha and 6,000 kg/ha 
in the wet and dry seasons, respectively. 
 

 
 
7. Nunkile 
Nunkile means “smells good” in the chiNkhonde 
language, which accurately describes this strongly 
scented rice variety.   
It is semi-dwarf (<100 cm) with grains measuring 9.8 
mm and 2.3 mm in length and width, respectively; 
has a milling yield of 68%.   
This is a short maturing variety: 112 days in the wet 
season and 140 days in the dry season.   
It has potential yields of 6,000 kg/ha and 5,500 
kg/ha in the wet and the dry seasons, respectively.  . 
 
 

 
 
8. Lifuwu (FRX 78-12) 
This is an early maturing (90-120 days)  
high quality (good milling, cooking and taste qualities) 
rice variety with high levels of adaptability.   
It yields between 4,500-5,000 kg/ha.   
It is less susceptible to the devastating rice blast 
disease (RBD).   
This variety is highly preferred by consumers because 
of its good aroma and long grains. 
 

 
9.Wambone (FRX 92-14) 
This is a medium maturing (more than 120 days), 
high quality (good milling, cooking and taste 
qualities) rice variety with a high level of 
adaptability.   
It is higher yielding (4,500-5,700 kg/ha) when 
compared with the two local varieties Faya and 
Kilombero that average 2,900 kg/ha.   
It is stable and less susceptible to the devastating 
RBD.   
It is a semi-dwarf variety that responds to high levels 
of fertilization without lodging.  This variety is also 
highly liked by consumers in Malawi because it is 
scented and has long grains. 
  
 

 
 
10. Kameme (IRAT 170) 
IRAT 170 is an early maturing (90-120 days), stable 
rice variety that is highly resistant to RBD.   
It is adapted to high altitude areas, such as Chitipa, 
which are prone to rice blast.   
It is slightly lower yielding than the recommended 
local varieties Faya and Kilombero, which average 
2,900 kg/ha, although relatively high yields (of up to 
3,700 kg/ha) have been obtained at Meru in Chitipa.   
This is a semi-dwarf variety that responds well to high 
levels of fertilization without lodging.  Although this 
variety is not scented, it is preferred by farmers 
because of its tolerance to rice blast, especially in 
upland areas 

 
 
 
However, some farmers still prefer other  
unimproved varieties so extension staff just need to 
encourage them to use recommended cultural 
practices for optimum results. Such varieties include; 
Kilombero,  
Kalulu,  
Mwasungo  
and Singano. 

 
Rice is best adapted to warm humid environment 
where there is proliferation of insects.  
Usually insect pests tend to cause greater damage to 
the crop while in the field thereby reducing the yield 
so much. 
Pests 
Major rice pests include;  
rats, rice weevil, green grasshoppers (Bwanoni), leaf 
hoppers, whorl maggots, stem borers and birds (Quelea 
quelea and weaverbird). 
 
 
Pest & Disease control 

 
Pests 
Major rice pests include;  
rats,  
rice weevil,  
green grasshoppers (Bwanoni),  
leaf hoppers, whorl maggots,  
stem borers and  
birds (Quelea quelea and weaverbird). 
Control:  
plant resistant varieties 
boiological control 
cultural control (rotation and field hygiene) 
 

 
Biological Pest control in Rice 
using Permaculture Systems  
in Tokyo Funabashi- Japan 

 
Diseases 
1. Rice Blust (Pyricularia oryzae) 
-It is a fungal panthogen 
-The disease is common in Nkhata Bay 
-It produces so may pathogenic races which tend to differ 
in terms of   varieties 
-It can best be controlled by planting resistant varieties 
2. Brown Spot (Helminthosporium oryzae) 
-Commonly found in soils suffering from K in balances, 
saline soils and low fertile soils. 
-excess shading aggravate the disease as intercropping in 
rice is not recommended 
 
 

 
 
Other diseases include; 
-Sheath Blight 
-Bacterial Blight 
-Bacterial streak. 
 
All the above diseases can be controlled by; 
-Planting resistant varieties 
-Applying fungicides and bactericides 
-Rotation and hygiene 
 

 
 
Harvesting 
Rice is harvested when the ear is nearly ripe and the 
straw is still slightly green.  
This stage is reached in early and late maturing 
cultivars normally at 4 and 6 weeks after flowering 
respectively.  
This is the time when the moisture content of the grain 
is about 18-25%. 
Harvesting is done by hand using a serrated sickle. 
You may the whole plant or just the heads together 
with the straw.  
Leave them in the field for 3-4days for further drying. 
 

 
Manual Rice 
Harvesting in 
Nagasaki-Japan 
Manual Rice 
Harvesting in 
Vietnam 

 
Deep Water Rice Harvesting – Ojibwa Indians - USA 

 
Combine Harvester in a rice field - Arkansas 

 
Combine-Harvester underwork in Taiwan 

 
Threshing 
Threshing is done by beating the plant against the 
hard floor or surface.  
Machines like foot-operated pedal thresher or 
operated drum type thresher are used for time saving 
especially in large scale production. 
Winnowing 
After threshing, winnowing is done to separate the 
grains from the husks and chaff.  
With a combine harvester, harvesting (cutting), 
threshing, winnowing and bagging are done in a 
single operation after which the grains are dried to 
12.5-13.0% M.C in a dryer. 
 

 
Rice Threshing  on drums - Bangladesh 

 
Winnowing rice  in  Thailand 

 
Drying rice ready for storage 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The End 

 
GROUNDNUT PRODUCTION 

 
Botanical name : Arachis hypogaea 
Common names:  Peanuts, monkey-nuts, earthnuts. 
 
Introduction:  
Groundnut is considered as one of the major cash 
crops.  
 It is widely grown in practically all the tropical and 
subtropical regions of the world for direct use as 
food, for oil and high protein meal produced after oil 
extraction.  
The protein meal can also be used as fish feed. 
 

 
 
The crop is said to have originated in the upper Plata 
basin of Bolivia at the foothills of Andes. The 
Portuguese navigators introduced it from South 
America to Africa, India and some parts of the 
world. 
From south America, Peru to Mexico and across the 
Pacific to China and Indonesia 
Origin 

 
 
The aim is to meet local and export demand by 
improving yield and quality of the groundnuts, but at 
the same time proving domestic oil industry raw 
materials. 
The present production levels for shelled nuts are: 
 450kg per ha for Chalimbana and Chatembana,  
750kg per ha for Manipinter and Mawanga and  
350 kg per ha for Malimba and RG 1.  
There is need to increase production levels of these 
groundnut varieties towards potential levels of 2000kg, 
2400kg and 1500kg per ha respectively. 
 
 
National aims & policy 

 
Botanical characteristics 

 
1.Roots 
Groundnut has well developed tap root with some 
lateral branches.  
Some adventitious roots develop from the hypocotyls 
and aerial branches.  
The smaller roots are found within the depth of 10-25cm 
for shallow soils while primary roots may grow up to 90-
120cm. 
2.Stem 
It has a central, upright stem with many lateral branches. 
In runner types, these lateral branches are prostrate 
while in bunch types, they are erect in early stages but 
become prostrate at a later stage. 
 

 
Depending on the stem system and growth habit 
groundnuts are grouped into: 
1. Runner/Spreading type 
In this type, the gynophores (pegs) are distributed from 
the basal to the terminal region of the branches or may 
occur in clusters along these branches up to 40cm  from 
the base of the plant. The pods are scattered underground 
in a relatively larger area around the  base of the plant. 
Cultivars of this group are known to be very productive 
and with large kernels (seeds). The only drawback with 
this group is that harvesting is difficult since many pods 
are left underground. 
 

 
2.Bunch type 
Such cultivars grow erect. The pods are clustered 
around the base of the plant and mature the same 
time. The pods and kernels are small and individual 
plants are not very productive.  
They mature early about three to four months. 
Harvesting is very easy and are suited for inter-row 
cultivation. 
 

 
4.Leaves 
Groundnuts has pinnate compound leaves which are 
usually composed of two pairs of leaflets.  
Leaves are dark green in the growth stage but they 
turn yellow and eventually grey-brown when the crop 
has matured. 
5. Flowers 
Flowers are small and yellow in colour. Such flowers 
may grow singly or in clusters of 2-4 close to the 
ground or indeed under the ground. Flowers develop 
4-6weeks after sowing but they reach a peak period at 
10-12weeks after sowing. 
 

 
6.Fruit 
The fruit is a pod and often consists of a shell which 
normally contains 1-3 seeds though sometimes the 
seed may be up to 6. The shell is generally reticulate 
and shows constrictions between seeds. It constitutes 
about 30-40% of the total weight of the fruit. 
7.Seed 
The seed is pink, red or brown in colour. It has papery 
seed coat which is extremely thin. It has two plump 
cotyledons. 
 

 

 
1. Altitude and latitude 
The crop is able to grow well within latitude range of 50
0 
 
North and South of Equator. 
It grows well within areas of about 1000m above sea level. 
However, specific varieties have been developed to suit 
specific area for better results. 
 
2. Temperature  
Groundnuts is a warm season crop that requires enough 
sunshine for normal development.  
For optimum results temperature range of 18-25
o
C is 
essential. 
 
Ecological requirements of Groundnuts 

 
 
3.Rainfall 
Annual rainfall requirement for this crop is about 
1000mm or more.  
Half  of this should be received during the growing 
season  to be followed by a distinct dry  season during 
which the pods ripen and mature. 
4.Soils 
The crop favors well drained, loose, friable sandy soils 
of poor fertility.  
Also it does best on fairly heavy soils provided they 
are rich in organic matter 
 

 
1.Chalimbana 
Chalimbana originated from Chipata in the Eastern Provice of 
Zambia.   
It is suited for production in all medium altitude plateau areas 
(500-1,500 masl).  
It is a Virginia runner type with an alternate branching pattern. 
   
It has large leaves with a thick stem; whereas the kernels are 
large with a dark tan testa, and the nut has an oil content of 
45%.   
It matures in 140-150 days, with a yield potential of over 1,300 
kg/ha shelled nuts.   
It is susceptible to all groundnut diseases (e.g. leaf spot and 
rosette), and is attacked by many insect pests, including aphids, 
termites, white grubs and Hilda patruelis.   
Chalimbana gives an excellent flavour when roasted, hence its 
high demand in the confectionery nut export trade. 
 
Varieties Malawi 

 
2.Chitembana 
This variety was developed at Chitedze Agricultural 
Research Station, and is cross between Chalimbana 
and RG 1.   
It is suited for growing in all medium altitude 
plateau areas (500 – 1,300 masl).  It is also a Virginia 
runner with an alternate branching pattern.   
It produces large, relatively constricted pods, 
containing two to three large kernels. 
matures in 140-150 days and has a yield potential of 
over 1,500 kg/ha (shelled nuts).  Chitembana is 
susceptible to all groundnut diseases 

 
3.Mani Pintar 
Mani Pintar originates from Bolivia, South America, 
and came to Malawi through Australia and Zambia.  
It is suited to low altitude areas (500-750) masl) along 
the Lakeshore plain.  
 Mani Pintar is an alternately branched spreading 
bunch type variety that matures in 130-140 days.   
It has high oil content (48%), making it highly 
suitable for oil extraction.   
It has a yield potential of over 1,500 kg/ha (shelled 
nuts) under good management.  Mani Pintar is also 
susceptible to all groundnut diseases  

 
 
4.Malimba 
Malimba originates from the Gambia, and is suited to 
low altitude areas (<500 masl), such as the Shire Valley 
and Lakeshore plain.   
It is a sequentially branched variety that matures 
between 110 and 120 days.   
It has an erect bunch growth habit with pale green 
leaves.   
The yield potential is between 900 and 1000 kg/ha 
(shelled nuts), and is marked as a confectionery nut.   
It is susceptible to all groundnut diseases. 

 
5.RG 1 
This variety was bred by Ron Gibbons at Chitedze, 
and is a cross between Makulu Red and line 48-14. 
The variety was developed for resistance to rosette, 
and is better suited to Thyolo and Mulanje districts 
where this disease is a serious problem.  RG 1 is an 
altenately branched spreading bunch variety that 
matures between 130 and 140 days.   
RG 1 can be used for oil extraction, and as 
confectionery nut.   
It has a high yield potential, with shelled nuts 
yielding in excess of 1,500 kg/ha under good 
management.  RG 1 is resistant to rosette, but it is 
susceptible to all the other diseases and insect pests.  

 
6.Mawanga 
This variety orginated from Bolivia and has 
popularly been known as South American Collection 
58 (SAC 58).   
It is suited to low altitude areas (<500 masl), such as 
the Shire Valley and the Lakeshore plain.   
Mawanga is an alternately branched and spreading 
bunch variety belonging to the Virginia botanical 
group.  
Mawanga has an oil content of 48-50%, so that it is 
highly suitable for oil extraction.   
It has a high yield potential of 2,000 kg/ha (shelled 
nuts). It is also susceptible to all groundnuts diseases 
and insect pests.  

 
7.Chitedze Groundnut 7 (CG 7) 
CG7 (ICGMS 42) is a confectionery nut that is smaller than 
Chalimbana with a high export demand.   
The European markets prefer it because it is ideal for machine 
processing owing to its seed size and shape. 
The variety is derived from a cross between USA 20 and TMV 
10, but was introduced into Malawi through the 
SADC/ICRISAT Regional Groundnut Programme based at 
Chitedze Agricultural Research Station.   
This is a long duration maturity variety (120-140days) with a 
hunch growth habit.  
The seeds are large (56 g/100 seed), red in colour, uniform in 
size and with 48% oil content.   
is suitable for both oil expression and the confectionery market.   
With good management, seed yields can exceed 2,000 kg/ha 
(shelled nuts).   

 
8.Kakoma JL 24) 
Kakoma, originally known as JL24, is an erect bunch 
type that is recommended for rain-fed production in 
all low lying areas (<500 masl, such as the Shire 
Valley and the Lakeshore plain. 
Suited for dimba cultivation under residual soil 
moisture in dimbas.   
It is drought tolerant and matures in 90-120 days 
after planting.   
Kakoma has no fresh seed dormancy, so that it 
should be harvested as soon as it matures.   
The seeds are medium (38 g/100 seed) in size, sweet, 
pale tan in colour with 48% oil content, making them 
suitable for the confectionery trade. 
 

 
9.Baka (ICG 12991) 
Baka was originally known as ICG 12991, and like Kakoma, it is 
another erect bunch type that is recommended for production in 
all low lying areas (<500 masl), such as the Shire Valley, and along 
the Lakeshore plain in Karonga and Salima districts.   
It is also suitable for dimba cultivation during the dry season 
(winter months).   
Baka has the added advantage in that it is rosette resistant and is 
relatively early maturing (90-100 days) when compared with other 
groundnut varieties, including Kakoma.   
It is also drought tolerant, and like Kakoma, has no fresh seed 
dormancy and should, therefore, be harvested as soon as it 
matures.   
Baka has small seeds (31g/100 seed) that are sweet and roundish 
in shape.   
The colour of the testa is pale tan, and has 43% oil content and 27% 
protein.   
This makes Baka suitable for the confectionery trade, particularly 
for the manufacturing of candies, biscuits, and yoghurt, among 
many other items. 
 
 

 
10.Nsinjiro (ICGV-SM 90704) 
Nsinjiro is the variety that was originally known as 
ICGV-SM 90704.   
It is a spreading bunch type of groundnut.   
Like CG 7, it matures between 120-140 days after 
planting.  It is recommended for production in all 
medium altitude areas (500-1,300 masl) of Malawi.   
It has a seed yield potential that is similar to CG 7 
(2,000 kg/ha shelled nuts).   
However, it has an added advantaged in that it is 
rosette-resistant.   
Seeds are uniform and medium in size (52 g/100 
seed), tan in colour with 74% oil content, and 
suitable for the confectionery trade. 
 
 

 
11.Chitala (ICGV-SM 99568) 
 Chitala (ICGV-SM 99568), which is a cross between 
ICGV 93437 and ICGV-SM 93561. 
It is a high yielding (<2000 kg/ha) confectionary 
groundnut variety that belongs to the Spanish 
botanical group with an elect growth habit.   
It matures in 90-105 days on the medium altitude 
plateau, such as Lilongwe plain, and in 90-100 days on 
low-altitude marginal rainfall areas, such as the 
Lakeshore plain, and is fairly resistant to resette.   
The seeds are large, uniform in size and tan-coloured, 
with a 100 seed weight of 40 g.   
The main attributes of Chitala are its large and 
uniform seed size, tan colour and its resistance to 
rosette. 
 

 
12.Chalimbana 2005 (C851/7) 
Chalimbana 2005 (C8517), which is a cross between 
RG 1 and Chalimbana is a high yielding (>2,500 
kg/ha) confectionary groundnuts variety that 
belongs to the Virginia botanical group.   
It is moderately resistant to rosette and easier to 
harvest than Chalimbana.   
It is an alternately branched and semi-spreading 
bunch variety that matures in 130-140 days.   
It is adapted to a wide range of environments in 
Malawi, especially on the medium altitude plateau.  
The seeds of Chalimbana 2005 are large and uniform 
in size, tan-coloured and characterized by a “milky” 
flavour, like Chalimbana.   

 
1.Production systems 
The crop by nature is an extremely soil exhausting and 
yields decline so fast if continuously grown on the 
same land management  unit.  
The crop uses the fertilizer residues left in the soil 
from the previous crop for effective nodulation and 
pod setting. 
There is also a build up of organisms causing root-rots 
and pod-rots if grown successively on the same piece 
of land.  
 
 
Field Management 

 
2.Land Preparation 
To achieve loose and friable soil into which the peg 
(gynophores) can easily penetrate and also to avoid 
excessive loss during harvesting, land should be 
thoroughly ploughed to a depth of 25-30cm.  
Remove debris and other stubble from the previous crop. 
All weeds should be destroyed during land preparation 
 
3.Time of planting 
In Malawi, planting is done with the first effective rains 
which normally comes  
around the second half of November in the southern part 
and  
about first half of December in Central and Northern parts. 
 

 
4.Planting and spacing 
For optimum plant population and maximum yields, it is 
important to use the recommended ridge and plant 
spacing for various varieties. 
Higher yields have been realised in the fields where ridges 
are constructed at 75cm apart.  
It is also important that supplying should be done within 
the first week after seedling emergence. 
There is need to treat groundnuts kernels with appropriate 
fungicides such as Aldrex T (aldrin and thiram) or 
Fernasan D (thiram).  
These fungicides prevent initial losses and ensure a full 
crop stand. 
 

 
Weed management in groundnut 
Weeds in groundnut comprise of diverse species of 
narrow-leaf, broad-leaf and sedges.  
Although the grassy weeds dominate in 
 number, broad-leaf weeds also offer a stiff competition 
to the crop. 
Besides affecting through direct competition for 
light, nutrient and water, weeds also have 
allelopathic affects on groundnut. i.e. 
significant reduction in groundnut germination and 
Reducing root and shoot length 

 
Mechanical methods 
Involves the use of a handle-hoe and some hand weeding. 
Hand pulling of individual weeds although primitive, is one of the 
most vital and effective methods of weed management. 
Banking is more effective as a final step of weeding 
Cultural Methods 
A good crop cover by adopting right inter-row (30 cm in bunch 
type and 45 cm in spreading type), and  
intra-row (10 cm) spacing will smother the growth of the weeds.  
Adopting proper crop rotation practices will help in overcoming 
the domination of certain weeds and reducing the weed 
competition 
Chemical methods 
Correct use of herbicides has proven to be safe and very effective 
against a diversity of both grassy and broad-leaf weeds i.e. 
fluchloralin @ 1.0 kg a.i./ha + pendimethalin (1.5 kg a.i/ha. 
fusillade @ 0.25 kg a.i./ha 

 
Weeding and Hygiene in a Groundnut field 

 
Diseases. 
1.Cercospora leaf spots  
(Cercospora personata & Cercospora arechidicola).  
Such disease are also known as tikka, viruela or brown 
spot. 
 It is a fungal disease and the most common in Malawi 
is the Cercospora arechidicola referred to as early leaf 
spot.  
This affect the crop soon after emergence and cause 
defoliation.  
The defoliated leaves if not removed may act as a 
source of the disease in the following season.   
Pest and Disease control 

 
The following control measures are recommended : 
Using resistant varieties or strains 
Removing or burying debris of the previous crop 
Practising rotation  
For larger scale chemical control with sulphur, a 
mixture of copper & sulphur or other organic 
fungicides 
2. Stem rot (Sclerotium rolfsii).  
It is a fungal disease and is commonly known as white 
mould, sclerotium rot, sclerotium blight, sclerotium wilt, 
root rot or foot rot.   
The disease is more pronounced in the warmer 
climates causing stems to rot close to the ground level. 
Control is by using resistant varieties, deep ploughing 
, constructing raised ridges, avoid throwing the soil to 
the base of the plant and practising crop rotation. 
 

 
 
3. Rosette:-  
Rosette is a serious virus disease characterised by 
condensation of the plant.  
The petiole and internodes are shortened giving the 
plant a typical rosette or clumped appearance. 
The best control is early planting at correct spacing. 
In areas like Phalombe plain where the disease is 
endemic  plant RG1 which is resistant to the disease. 
 

 
Pests. 
1. Termites: (Amitermes evuncifer) 
Termites cause two kinds of damage: 
Scarification of the pods. This weakens the shells and 
makes them liable to shattering or cracking during 
harvesting. 
Penetration & hollowing of the tap root. Termites are 
capable of reaching upper parts of the plant inside the 
stems. This is common in wet periods of the growing 
season and pass unnoticed until the plants wilt and 
die. 
 

 
 
 
Control of termites 
 
Use uniform cultivars to ensure even ripening and 
single harvesting. 
There is need to have repeated mechanical cultivation 
to reduce termite population 
For termite prone areas, aldrin or dieldrin can be used 
at a rate of 500g a.i. (active ingredient) per hectare. 
Seeds can also be dressed with aldrin at 28.5g a.i per 
kg of seed. 
 

 
 
2. Leaf-hoppers (Hilda patruelis) 
 
These hoppers are 0.5cm long with green brown 
markings. 
They have a sucking habit and as such, they cause 
plants to wilt and collapse.  
Can be controlled by using dieldrin dust at 1.12kg a.i. 
per hectare sprayed before planting. 
 

 
3. Cut-worms (Agrotis ipsilon) 
The worms cause young plants to be completely or 
partially severed at the ground level.  
It also attack developing pods of older plants causing 
yield reduction. 
Worms can be controlled by using 450g of 50% 
dieldrin of Wettable  (Water) Powder plus 50kg of 
maize meal which is then wetted crumbly.  
Apply this mixture per hectare as a chemical bait and 
should be broadcasted in the afternoon so that they 
are able to feed on it before it gets dry. 
 

 
Harvesting  
Check the crop by lifting a few pods to see if they are 
mature.  
Timely harvesting of groundnuts is essential to avoid 
discolouration and germination of nuts.  
Some pods may also be left in the ground if 
harvested late.  
Dry the nuts after lifting them from the ground. 
Drying can be done using window system to allow 
free-air circulation for even drying 
During lifting, the pods contain 50-55% moisture and 
should be dried to 25% moisture content before 
storage. 
 

 

 

 

 
Storage:  
Store the nuts under a very dry condition since wet 
conditions enhance fungus development particularly 
the fungus that causes Aflatoxin referred to as 
Aspergillus flavus. 
 
Shelling: 
Sh 
elling is done by either hand or machine. 
However, it is not a good practice to wet the pods 
before shelling as this may attract fungus 
development. 
 

 
 
 
The End 
 

 
Soybean Production 

 
 
Botanical name:   Glycine max (Glycine spp) 
Common names:  Nyemba za Soya, Mtedza wa Soya, 
   Soya bean, Soybean 
 
Origin and Distribution 
Soybean originated from South East Asia (China in 
particular) in as early as 2800 BC.  
It was an important food plant in the Orient world 
(China, Manchuria, Korea and Japan) since the 
earliest times and was carried to Europe by French 
missionaries in 1740  
 

 
Soy sauce had been popular in Europe and the 
British colonies in America before soybean seeds 
arrived. It wasn‟t until 1851 that soybean seeds were 
distributed to farmers in Illinois and the corn belt 
states.  
This seed was a gift from a crew member rescued 
from a Japanese fishing boat in the Pacific Ocean in 
1850.  
In the 1870s soybeans increased in popularity with 
farmers who began to plant them as forage for their 
livestock 
 

 
In 1904, the famous American chemist, George 
Washington Carver discovered that soybeans are a 
valuable source of protein and oil.  
He also realized the benefits of soybeans for 
preserving good quality soil.  
Mr. Carver encouraged cotton farmers to “rotate” their 
crops in a three-year plan so that peanuts, soybeans, 
sweet potatoes or other plants would replenish the soil 
with nitrogen and minerals for two seasons, and then 
the third year farmers planted cotton.  
To the surprise of many farmers, produced a far better 
cotton crop than they had seen for many years! 

 
Henry Ford is known for producing automobiles but 
did you know that he once made a car with plastic 
bodywork made from soybeans 
 Ford owned a large research facility.  
He came to the lab one day with a bag of soybeans.  
He dumped them out on the floor and told the 
scientists, “You guys are supposed to be smart. You 
ought to be able to do something with them.”  
In no time, the scientists in Ford‟s lab made a strong 
enough plastic for the:  
gearshift knobs, horn buttons, window frames, accelerator 
pedals, light-switch assemblies and ignition-coil casings 
They also fashioned the exterior of an automobile from 
“soybean plastic.” By 1935 Ford was using one bushel of 
soybeans for every car he manufactured. 

193 
 Flexible Foam Seating from Soybean 
Cargill supplying Woodbridge in Ontario for use 
by Ford 

Lubricants & Hydraulic fluids  

Paints, Coatings & Inks 

 
Common Utilization of Soybean 
Soy bean is a drought resistant legume that should be 
encouraged in africa since due to perpetual food insecurity. 
Its utilization can best be achieved  by several Processing 
technologies for preparation of multi-purpose soybean 
products i.e.  
Coffee, Milk, Fritters, Porridge, Fried Soya nuts, Meat and 
vegetables with Soya sauce, Cheula, Kadyaubwerere, 
Chikondamoyo (Local bread), Nsima, Thobwa, etc. 
However soy bean contains an inhibitor called trypsin which 
reduces protein digestion.  
The anti-quality factors make the soybean to taste bad and 
can only be removed through roasting, soaking and boiling 

 
Importance of Soybean 
1.It is a source of proteins  
Has a high protein value more than other pulses and meats 
(When one takes soybeans, she/he gets the highest value of 
protein as compared to the one who takes meat). 
Leaves have high Nitrogen value, making the crop an 
alternative to fertilizer if grown intensively. 
Has all essential amino acids needed for growth especially in 
children and small ruminants.  
2.Used to generate cash by selling either the crop raw or 
processed product of soybean. 
3.improve soil fertility under crop rotation or as an intercrop 
with another crop (nitrogen fixing, falling leaves or crop 
residues add fertility to the soils). 
4.Stabilizes and improves  the soil structure by making a 
ground cover. 
 

 
The objective is to encourage the growing and utilization of 
the crop in a bid to increase yields from the present: 
 400 to 800 Kg per hectare to potential levels of up to 3,500 Kg per 
hectare. 
IITA(International Institute of Tropical Agriculture) is one 
organisation in Malawi looking into Soy Bean improvement.  
Its researchers have developed high yielding and disease 
resistant varieties of Soy Bean like TGx1740-2F, TGx1987-
10F, and TGx1987-62F. 
 
National Aim & Policy. 

 
Botanical Characteristics 

 
Roots 
After the soybean seed is planted, it develops a primary root 
system in order to anchor the plant.  
This primary root remains for about five to 15 days. During 
this time, the primary root spreads out.  
Once the plant develops further, the root system becomes a 
taproot system.  
These roots can grow around 15-20 cm deep.  The taproots 
deliver nitrogen from the soil to the plant's stem. 
 

 
Stem 
Soybean plants emerge from the soil with a hypocotyl 
hook(which is the curved growth that emerges from the 
seed and later becomes the stem).  
This part develops below the cotyledons (seed leaves). It 
lengthens, straightens and grows quickly in a period known 
as the vegetative period.  
The stem features a tip known as the terminal bud, the 
removal of which may cause side branches to grow on the 
plant.  
The stem develops nodes, which are areas at which the 
leaves attach to the stems. Once the soybean plant matures, 
the stem turns yellow or brown. 
 

 

 
Leaves  
Just after emerging from the soil, soybean plants develop 
seed leaves known as cotyledons.  
Cotyledons come from the original germinated seed and 
provide the young plant with food as it grows.  
These seed leaves remain on the plant until the first set of 
real leaves develop. After the photosynthetic leaves develop, 
the cotyledons fall off.  
From there, the real leaves produce food for the plant using 
photosynthesis.  
The unifoliolates develop first, growing with one leaf on a 
petiole, the small stalk attaching the leaf to the stem. 
Following that, the leaves grow in leaflets of three and are 
known as trifoliolates. 
 

 
Flowers 
After development of six to ten trifoliate leaves, soybean 
plants enter their reproductive period.  
During this time, they develop flowers. These flowers grow 
on the nodes of the plant, with each node supporting 
between three and 15 flower buds.  
The blooms resemble pea flowers. They grow to about ¼ 
inch wide and come in white, pink or purple.  
The flowers feature both male and female parts. Soybean 
flowers engage in self-pollination in order to produce seeds. 
 
 

 

 
Pods  
Once a soybean plant flowers and is pollinated, the plant 
produces a pod, usually about one to two weeks after 
flowering.  
Each pod usually containing three to four seeds.  
During the filling period, the seeds are 45- 55% MC. Pods 
turn from green to yellow or brown once the seeds mature, 
while the mature soybean seed turns yellow. 
 
 

 
Seeds 
Soybean seed occur in various sizes, and in many colors which include, include 
black, brown, blue, yellow, green.  
The mature bean is hard, water resistant, and protects the cotyledon from 
damage.  
If the seed coat is cracked, the seed will not germinate.  
 

 
Temperature 
 Soya bean needs about 20 to 32
0
C temperature for 
germination but for rapid growth the crop needs higher 
temperature, 20-25
0
C , while levels above or below 20-
32
0
C reduce bacterial activity and slows the establishment 
of the N-fixing relationship. 
 Combinations of high temperature and low precipitation 
are unfavorable, this creates humid conditions which result 
in fungi attacks on the pods and beans 
Ecological Requirements 

 
Soils 
The best soil type is sandy loam having good organic matter content. 
However it is a nitrogen fixing plant, so it is able to adapt to low 
fertility soils. 
 However,  when soil N levels are too high, nodule number and 
activity decreases. Roots do not attract nitrogen fixing  bacteria, so 
N-fixation is limited or non-existent. 
 
Rainfall 
The crop requires about 60-65 cm annual rainfall drought at 
flowering or just before flowering results in flower and pod drops, 
while rains during maturity impairs the grain quality of soyabean.  
It is harmful if soil pores are filled with water, not air, since there is 
no Nitrogen  fixation.  
 

 
Seed  Preparation and inoculation 
 
Seed should be inoculated with Rhizobium 
bacteria called Rhizobium japonica which is 
used by leguminous plants.  
 
An Inoculant is an additive to the seed of 
some species that helps speed up 
germination.  
 
Field Management 

 
Steps in seed inoculation 
Prepare 200-300 ml of a 5% sugar solution by 
dissolving one matchbox full of sugar into 
water contained in a bottle of fanta.  
Mix one satchet of inoculant (50 g) into this 
solution to form a thick liquid (slurry).  
Pour this thick liquid over 25 kg of seed and 
mix until all the seed is evenly coated. 
Leave to dry in the shed for 30 minutes. Plant 
seed within 24 hours of inoculation.       
 

 
Time of Planting 
 
Plant with the first rains and not later than end-December.  
Plant in two rows spaced at 30 cm on the ridge and place 
one seed per planting station 5 cm apart or plant one seed 
per station spaced at 2.5 cm apart on a single row on the 
ridge.  
Seed rate is 70 to 90 kg per hectare. Soybean grown under 
residual moisture in dimbas or irrigation schemes should 
be planted between second week of June and second week 
of July. 
 

 
Weeding 
 
Planting soybeans in narrow rows restricts weed 
growth by shading.  
Rotary hoeing when the soybeans have 2 to 3 leaves 
is effective.  
Chemical weed control can be done before planting 
the crop or before emergency of the crop. 
 

 

 
Fertilizer application 
Soybeans, just like groundnuts, have the ability of utilizing 
fertilizer residues that are normally not available to other 
crops.  
The plant excrete special enzymes that help in breaking 
down soil-fertilizer complexes holding essential minerals 
in a form that most plants can not use them.  
However to ensure good yields, soybeans do best on soils 
of high fertility.  
Basing on soil tests, the application of 50kg P
2
O
5
 and 
60kg K2O per hectare may be recommended.  
Calcium and Magnesium are usually applied to acidic soils 
to raise the pH to 6.0 or 6.5. Sulfur or other micro-
nutrients are not usually applied except on strongly 
weathered, coarse-textured alkaline or organic soils. 
  
 

 
VARIETIES  
There are many varieties of Soybeans as follows; Ocepara-4, 
Santa-rosa, Duocrop, Geduld, Hardee, Davis, Bossier, 
Impala, Kudu, 427/5/6, 501/6/12, 491/6/7, Magoye and 
Solitaire. Magoye provide the largest soil fertility benefit to 
maize compared to other varieties. 
 
1.Ocepara 4 
Ocepara 4 is an indeterminate variety with a high yield 
potential of over, 4000kg/ha. It well adapted in medium 
plateau areas characterized by a prolonged rainfall season. It is 
resistant to root knot nematode which is prone in sandy loamy 
soils. Ocepara 4 is also resistant to lodging. 
 

 
2. Santarosa 
It is determinate variety with a yield potential of over 
3,000kg/ha.  
This variety is suited in medium altitude areas.  
If grown in high altitude areas characterized by cool moist 
conditions will cause the stems to remain vegetative while 
the pods are ready for harvesting.  
It has high lodging and shattering resistance. 
 

 
3. Solataire 
Fully released in August 2003 by SeedCo-Zimbabwe and 
SeedCo-Malawi in collaboration with the National 
Soybean Breeding Programme.   
This is a determinate soybean variety that originates from 
Zimbabwe and matures in 86 days.   
The seed coat is yellow and the helium is gray with a seed 
size of 20 g/100 seeds.  It has a high yield potential of 
more than 3,500 kg/ha and is widely adapted to most 
parts of Malawi. 
 

 
4. Davis 
It is a determine variety and early maturing. It has yield 
potential of over 3,000kg/ha.  
It is best cultivated in marginal mean rainfall areas of 
between 700-900mm such as Salima, Bwanje Valley and 
Shire Valley. Has medium resistance to lodging. 
 
5 Bossier 
Bossier is a determinate variety of early maturing i.e 
110-120days. It has yield potential of about 
3,000kg/ha. It grows well in the same climatic 
conditions just like Davis. It has medium to strong 
lodging and shattering resistance. 
 

 
 
6. Duocrop  
It is indeterminate variety with very high potential yield 
of about 4000kg/ha.  
It is more adapted medium plateau to upland areas 
characterized by prolonged rainfall season. However, this 
variety has a very short seed viability and this affects the 
required seedrate. 
7. Impala 
The variety is indeterminate with high yielding 
potential of over 3,500kg/ha.  
It is adapted for cultivation in medium plateau to 
upland areas with prolonged rainfall season. Has 
good lodging resistance. 
 

 
8. Kudu 
It is indeterminate variety with very high potential yield 
of over 4000kg/ha. The variety is also well cultivated in 
medium plateau to upland areas of prolonged rainfall. It 
has good lodging resistance. 
  
9. Hardee  
An indeterminate variety with yield potential of over 
2,500kg/ha. It is adapted in areas where kudu can grow. 
Has some resistance to shattering and lodging. 
 

 
10. Kudu 
It is indeterminate variety with very high potential yield 
of over 4000kg/ha.  
The variety is also well cultivated in medium plateau to 
upland areas of prolonged rainfall. It has good lodging 
resistance. 
11. Hardee  
An indeterminate variety with yield potential of over 
2,500kg/ha.  
It is adapted in areas where kudu can grow. Has some 
resistance to shattering and lodging. 
 

 
Pests and Disease Control 
1. Nematodes 
Nematodes are a major problem in soybean production. 
Root knot nematode causes knot-like swellings or galls on 
the roots. This results in stunted growth  which wilts 
during dry weather and show marginal firing of the leaves. 
Rotation with unsusceptible crops such as small grains and 
sorghum may be  the best control. 
2. Insects 
Velvet bean caterpillars, armyworms, beetles and 
grasshoppers are the major problems in soybeans. One 
insecticide application is usually sufficient to controlinsect 
attacks. Control can also be done by applying Tephrosia 
vogelii (Fish bean) seeds and leaves which are a good local 
insecticide. 
  
 

 
3. Rabbits 
Rabbits have a great fondness for the soybeans. Where 
rabbits are numerous  they will completely destroy small 
isolated fields of soybeans unless they are  excluded by a 
tight fence. 
 

 
Diseases  
Soybeans once considered a disease-free crop, but since it 
has been grown long enough several diseases have become 
a potential problem.  About 50 diseases attack soybeans. 
Some of the common diseases are:- 
1. Bacterial Blight 
It is a bacterial disease caused by Pseudomonas glycinea 
It occurs on the  leaves of the soybean plant as small 
angular spots which at first are yellow to light brown, but 
later they become dark brown to almost black. Diseased 
tissues of the leaves may finally become dry and drop out. 
The spots sometimes spread to the stems and pods. 
Control 
-Crop rotation. 
-Turning under of crop residues. 
-Some varieties are partly resistant. 
 

 
2. Downy Mildew  
Downy Mildew is a fungal disease caused by Peronospora 
manchurica. The  disease is seed borne as such its 
occurrence is when the infected seed are  planted. 
The first leaves to unfold are frequently covered with the 
characteristic mildew growth.  
Control 
•-Crop rotation 
•-Ploughing (plowing) under of residues 
•-Planting disease-free seed  
 

 
3. Brown Spot 
-caused by fungus Septoria glycines  
-it attacks leaves, stems, and pods causing early leaf 
defoliation. 
-shows small reddish brown angular spots on leaves. 
-can be controlled through crop rotation. 
 
4. Brown Stem Rot  
-caused by soil inhabiting fungus Cephalosporium gregatum 
that decays the interior of the stem. 
-it attacks the plant early in the season but symptoms are seen 
later in the year. 
-the diseased plant will show reddish brown colour in the 
centre of the stem. 
-can best be controlled through rotation. 
 

 
Harvesting 
The crop is mature when pods have turned brown or gray 
depending on variety.  
Harvesting should be done when leaves of the crop have 
fallen off and pods rattle when shaken. This is normally 
from April to late May. 
Harvesting can be done physically or mechanically 
depending on the scale of production.  
Late harvesting increases shattering as well as splitting of 
the over-dried beans in threshing.  
After harvesting, It is necessary to conduct Threshing and 
winnowing especially under manual harvesting to remove 
all immature and broken grain. 
 
 
  
 

 

 
Physical/manual harvesting of soybean 
 

 
Mechanical Harvesting using a combiner 

 

 
Manual Threshing of soybean 

 
Machine Threshing of soybean 
 

 
Storage 
Soybeans should be stored in a cool and dry place for not 
more than nine months.  
It normally looses viability if stored for a longer period 

 
Soybean under Warehouse 

 
 
 
The End 
 

 
Cotton Production 

 
Generic name :  Gossypium 
Species : G. hirsutum 
  : G. barbadense  
  : G. Arboreum 
  : G. herbaceum  
Introduction 
Cotton is one of the most important vegetable fibres 
used for may purposes but the major one being for 
making textiles used in the manufacturing of large 
proportion of man‟s clothing.  
In early times, cotton was the principal fabric in 
India and some parts of the world. 

 
Shoes made of Cotton fiber 

 
100% Cotton garments & Fabrics 

 
Origin and Distribution. 
The various species of Gossypium have originated in 
different centres. 
Gossypium barbadense is said to have originated Brazil. 
This is most commonly grown specie and is often known as 
G. barbadense var. brazileae. In Malawi it is grown wild and 
is called Thonje Manga. 
G. Arboreum originated in India. In Malawi the G. 
arboretum var. indicum was discovered in 1860s and is 
believed to have extinct. Locally it was known as Thonje 
Kaja. 
G. hirsutum is believed to have originated in southern 
Mexico and the commonly grown is G. hirsutum var. 
latifolium. In Malawi it is grown in some parts of Ntcheu. 
G. herbaceum was in South Africa. It is bushy perennial and 
common ancestor for the diploid cultivated cotton. The 
commonly grown specie is G. herbaceum var. African. 
 

 
National aims 
As a national aim, there is need to increase production and 
improve quality to meet local demand and then export any 
surpluses.  
Average seed cotton yield range from 700 to 800kg per 
hectare. However, with good management, yields of 
between 2500 to 3000kg per hectare can be realised.  
There is need therefore to improve production towards 
potential levels. 
 

 
Ecological requirements 
Altitude  
It grows well up to 1200m above sea level. Most cotton 
varieties however will show their yield potential 60-80m 
above sea level. 
 
Temperature  
Cotton is a photoperiodic sensitive crop. In low 
temperatures, there is increased vegetative growth with 
less fibre. This extends the maturity duration.  
On the other hand, high temperatures increase fruit 
branches and hastens maturity. That is why in areas around 
lakeshore it matures within 145days and in upper areas it 
may go up to 175days. 
. 
 

 
Rainfall 
The crop requires 28days of frost free period. The crop is 
capable of growing in low moisture conditions and as such 
rainfall of between 600-700mm is adequate. 
Soils  
The soils should be well drained and free from lodging. 
Heavy clays are not suitable since they are impervious and 
cause ponding.  
Shallow soils are not suitable as well since they don’t 
return moisture. The soils should have pH range of 7-8. 
 
The most common producing areas of cotton in Malawi include;  Shire 
Valley, Phalombe plain, Zomba West, Machinga, Mangochi west, Bwanje 
valley, lakeshore areas of Dedza, Salima, Nkhotakota, Karonga, Henga valley 
and Rumphi. 
 
 

 
Botanical characteristics 
Cotton is a weak perennial plant but it is grown as annual 
plant to prevent diseases and pests. Vegetative buds and 
reproductive buds are produced at the same time. 
 
Roots  
It has a tap root system which can grow up to 2.4m deep. 
After emergence elongation of roots is faster than stem 
and this may continue to about 3-6days. Later on lateral 
roots may develop from the tap root. 
 

 
 
Stems  
 
Cotton has a dimorphic branching system: 
a)Monopidia (vegetative branches). One or more may 
develop from the base of the tree which may bear 
secondary sympodia. 
 
a)Sympodia (fruiting branches): these develop from the 
stem. 
 
 

 

 
Leaves  
They are palmately lobed with 3-5 lobes with a long 
petiole. Leaves are hairy underneath making it resistant to 
jassid. 
 
Flowers  
They are self pollinated.  
The petals (corolla) are white the first day and then turn 
pink and eventually shed to reveal the young boll.  
There are 5 petals and 5 calyx on each flower. 
 

 
Bolls  
Each boll has 4 to 5 locules or chambers or capsules 
with 9-10 seeds in each capsule. 
Lint grows on seed. Each lint is a single cell which 
elongates for about 18 days from opening of flower 
and form a fibre. The fibre thickens about 3weeks 
later. 
 
 

 
Common Varieties 
IRM 81 
Adapted to altitude 500 and 1000 masl e.g phalombe, 
balaka, mwanza, machinga, henga valley, Lilongwe, 
kasungu, mchinji. 50 days from flowering to boll 
maturation. P 
otential yield is 3800kg/ha and has an average ginning 
out of 36.8%.  
This variety is produced for its good fibre.  
 

 
Makoka 78 (ALA 54) 
It has an indeterminate, short and compact growth 
habit, and is able to recover from short periods of 
drought.   
It is adapted to all cotton growing areas in Malawi, 
including areas that are characterized by cool 
temperature on the medium altitude plateau areas 
above 1,000 masl in the southern region, and the 
Chitipa plain in northern Malawi.   
 
Rasam 17 
It is suited to the Lakeshore plain (areas stretching 
from Ulongwe through Mangochi to South Nkhota-
kota and Karonga), where it produces heavier seed 
cotton yields than Makoka 78, with ginning outturn 
(GOT) that is consistently one unit better than Makoka 
78, and with boll sizes that are equal to or better than 
Makoka 78.   
 

 
Ezam 6 
Ezam 6 outyield Makoka 78 by 12% and 15% in seed 
cotton and lint yields, respectively, and by a unit in 
terms of GOT.   
However, in spite of high seed cotton yields, it 
produces rather short and weak fibres along the 
Lakeshore plain and medium altitude plateau areas.  It 
is recommended for commercial production in the 
lower Shire valley (Chikwawa and Nsanje districts), 
where it yields better than Makoka 78.   
Makoka 2000 
Has compact growth habit with an open canopy that 
facilitates effective ground canopy spraying. It is tolerant to 
bacterial blight and takes 53 days sowing and flowering 
period. It takes 44 days boll opening from flowering. The 
potential yield is 3000kg/ha 
 
 
 

 
Field management 
Land preparation 
Practice deep ploughing to break the soil pan. This must 
be done before planting. There is need to prepare land 
early to facilitate early planting. 
Ridges should be made at 90cm apart and construct box 
ridges at every 3.6m to hold the first rains 
Planting   
Plant 8-10 seeds per station spaced at 60cm.  
For mechanical planting 3-5seeds are used at a spacing of 
20-30cm. 
 
Deadline for planting is 7
th
 January except in Karonga where it may continue up 
to end January. Upland cotton should be planted earlier to enable the crop 
mature before cold season which causes an increase in boll drop. The required 
seedrate is 22-28kg/hectare non linted and 15-20kg/hectare delinted. 
 
 

 
Supplying & Thinning 
Supplying should be done 2-3days after emergence. 
Once the plants have attained 4 true-leaves (15-21cm 
high) then thinning will be necessary and leave 2-3 
plants per station. Make sure the conditions are not 
too dry.  
Weeding 
Weed early  and where necessary.  
Banking may not be necessary except where rains 
have seriously reduced the ridges. 
 

 
Fertilizer Application. 
For Basal fertilizers apply 100-150 kg of  23 : 21 : 0 + 4S 
three- fourth after emergence.  
This should be followed by 100kg S/A after three weeks. 
However it is recommended that Nitrogen fertilizers 
should be applied during flowering when the crop respond 
positively to nitrogen up-take. 
Boron should be applied particularly in areas where there 
is boron deficiency. Apply at the rate of 0.6kg/ha  using 
71g of product in 13.5litres of spray mix and spray with 
the first 6 sprayings.  
This boron is commercially known as Waxal and is 
sprayed in combinations with other pesticides such as 
Decistab  
 
 

 
Pests and Diseases control. 
Pests 
 
General Spraying  
This exercise normally starts as soon as thinning is 
completed and when the level of pest attack justifies the 
spraying. 
Spray weekly up until 3-5 bolls have opened and thereafter 
spray when necessary. 
Scouting  
(assessment of the insect attack) 
The purpose is to determine the period when spraying should 
having assessed the occurrence of the pets. 
 
 
 

 
Scouting Techniques 
Boll worm egg counting:- inspect 24 plants at equal 
intervals selected at diagonals of the field 
General scouting  inspect 24 plants random while making 
a zig-zag tour of the garden. Inspect damage and the actual 
insects themselves. 
Common Pests in cotton Field 
Cotton is usually infested with a number of pests and 
diseases and the most common pests being: 
 jassids,  
aphids,  
bollworms (red, pink, spiny and American/African),  
cotton stainers, 
 elegant grasshoppers. 
 
 

 
Most effective chemicals include. 
Decistab - kills bollworms and cotton stainers. Decistab is 
in tablet form and is applied by mixing 1 tablet of decistab 
to 15 litres of water. Since the bollworms and cotton stainers 
feed on bolls, the chemical is sprayed on the bolls 
Marshal - kills phids and jassids. Aphids and jassids feeds 
on leaves. Spraying should be done after conducting a 
thorough scouting to establish their presence since marshal 
is an expensive chemical and requires rational use. Marshal 
is applied at the rate of 40mls per 15-litre sprayer for 
0.01ha. of land  
Wuxal - this is a foliar fertilizer contains boron. Boron is 
deficient in most soils hence the need to supply through 
foliar. Waqxual is an adhensive element and sticks to the 
leaf making the leaf surface to drain off the water easily. Its 
application is done in combination with Decistab to enable 
it stick to the leaf for a longer period. 
 

 
Calendar of chemical application and procedures  
 
Spray 1 (Week 6 of germination):  
flower buds starts to develop and bollworms become 
common to infest on the bolls. Control by applying Decistab 
in tablet form combined with Wuxal as foliar fertilizer. 
Decistab should be applied at 5 tablets per 0.5ha by mixing 
1 tablet in 15-litre sprayer. Wuxal should be applied at 
40mls per 15-litre sprayer (200mls per 0.5ha). 
Spray 2 (week 8 of germination):  
After conducting a successful scouting of bollworms in 
week 7, week 8 should be for the second spraying using 
Decistab and Wuxal (5 sprays per 0.5ha.).  
If aphids and jassids are noticed, spray Marshal 40mls per 
15-litre sprayer (200mls for 0.5ha). To be more effective, 
mix Marshal, Decistab and Wuxal in a single sprayer and 
apply at once. 
 

 
Spray 3 (Week 10 of germination):  
After scouting for any bollworms, aphids and jassids in 
week 9, the third spraying will depend on the scouting 
results.  
Spray as in week 6 for bollworms.  
But if aphids and jassids are found, then spray as in week 8 
(combining Decistab, Marshal and Wuxal in one sprayer). 
 
Spray 4 (Week 12 of germination): 
This is done after scouting for bollworms in week 11. 
spraying should be done just as in week 6. 
 
 

 
 
Spray 5 (week 14 of germination): 
Re-apply Decistab and Wuxal as in week 6. this is after 
bollworm scouting in week 13.  
 
During this spray, 1 litre of Wuxal for 0.5ha will be 
finishing. 
 
Spray 6 (week 16 of germination): 
Spray Decistab only and no need for Wuxal as fertilizer 
since the cotton crop is almost ready.  
Decistab will be used to control bollworms and cotton 
stainers.  
Cotton stainers normally occur during week 16. Decistab 
will have to finish during this spraying.  
 

 
Manual Spraying in Cotton field 

 
Boom sprayers  
Aerial Prayers 

 
Diseases: 
The most common  diseases in cotton include: 
Bacterial blight,  
boll rot and  
Angular leaf spot 
Control by: 
Using resistant varieties,  
Use certified seed ,  
Crop rotation,  
Early planting,  
Burning of residues after harvesting  
 

 
Harvesting 
Cotton harvesting (also known as picking) starts 
whenever 3-5 bolls have opened on most plants.  
Picking is a continuous process every 10-14days.  
Pick a grade at a time to serve time when doing the 
final grading. 
 

 