

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
 
  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
2 
 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
 
 
ICAR e-Course  
For  
B.Sc (Agriculture) and B.Tech (Agriculture) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
3 
 
 
Course Outlines 
 
Lecture 01: Farm Power in INDIA – Human, Animal, Mechanical and Electrical Energy 
Sources and their Use in Agriculture 
 
Lecture 02: Two Stroke and Four Stroke Engines, Working Principles, Applications- Types, 
Power and Efficiency 
 
Lecture 03: Different Systems of IC Engine- Cooling, Lubricating, Fuel Injection Systems 
 
Lecture 04: Tractors- Types and Utilities 
 
Lecture 05: Tillage- Objectives and Types Furrow terminology and Methods of Ploughing. 
Field Capacity and Field Efficiency  
 
Lecture 06: Primary Tillage- Objectives, Mouldboard Plough, Disc Plough, Chisel Plough, 
Subsoiler, Components and Functions, Types, Advantages and Disadvantages  
 
Lecture 07: Secondary Tillage Equipment– Harrows, Land Forming Equipment-Rotavators- 
Wetland Equipment – Puddlers and Manure Tramplers - cage wheels 
 
Lecture 08: Sowing method- Seeds Drills, Seed Cum Fertilizer Drills- Components and 
Functions 
 
Lecture 09: Paddy Transplanters, Types, Working Principle, Field and Nursery Requirements 
 
Lecture 10: Implements for Intercultural Operations- Hoes, Long Handles Weeders, 
Cultivators and Rotary Tillage 
 
Lecture 11: Sprayers and their Functions, Classification, Manually Operated Sprayers, Power 
Sprayers-Dusters, Types and Uses Sprayers 
 
Lecture 12: Harvesting Tools and Equipment- sickles, Paddy Reapers and Combine- 
Harvesting Machinery for Groundnut, Tuber Crops-Sugarcane Harvesters 
 
 Lecture 14: Equipment for Land Development and soil conservation- Dozers, Levelers, Chisel 
plough, Sub Soil Plough, Blade Harrow, Bund Former Land Leveling 
 
Lecture 13: Tools for Horticultural Crops- Propagation Tools, Planters and Harvesting Tools 
and Machinery 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
4 
Lecture 15: Cost of Operation of Farm Machinery- Problem Solving 
 
Lecture 16: Tractor and implement selection for different Agricultural Operations 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
5 
 
 
 
Lecture 01 
FARM POWER IN INDIA - HUMAN, ANIMAL, MECHANICAL AND 
ELECTRICAL ENERGY SOURCES AND THEIR USE IN AGRICULTURE 
 
Farm Power is an essential input in agriculture for timely field operations for increasing 
production and productivity of land. Farm power is used for operating different types of 
machinery like tillage, planting, plant protection, harvesting and threshing machinery and 
other stationary jobs like operating irrigation equipment, threshers/ shellers / cleaners/ 
graders, etc. 
 
SOURCES OF FARM POWER 
There are different sources of farm power available in India which are classified as 
1. Human power 
2. Animal power 
3. Mechanical power (Tractors + Power tillers + Oil engines) 
4. Electrical power 
5. Renewable energy (Biogas + Solar energy + Wind energy) 
HUMAN POWER 
Human power is the main source for operating small implements and tools at the farm. 
Stationary work like chaff cutting, lifting, water, threshing, winnowing etc are also done by 
manual labour. An average man can develop maximum power of about 0.1 hp for doing farm 
work. 
 
 
 
Paddy Nursery collection Nursery transport Paddy transplanting 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
6 
  
 
weeding weeding Winnowing 
 
ANIMAL POWER 
Power developed by an average pair of bullocks about 1 hp for usual farm work. Bullocks are 
employed for all types farm work in all seasons. Besides bullocks, other animals like camels, 
buffaloes, horses, donkeys, mules and elephants are also used at some places. The average 
force a draft animal can exert is nearly one-tenth of its body weight. 
 
 
 
 
Ploughing a land Ploughing a land Bullock cart 
  Persian wheel- water 
lifting 
MECHANICAL POWER 
Broadly speaking, mechanical power includes stationary oil engines, tractors, power tillers and 
self propelled combines. Internal combustion engine is a good device for converting liquid fuel 
into useful work (mechanical work). These engines are two types 
1. Spark ignition engines (Petrol or Kerosene engine) 
2. Compression ignition engines (Diesel engines) 
The thermal efficiency of diesel engine varies from 32 to 38 per cent whereas that of petrol 
engine varies from 25 to 32 per cent. 
In modern days, almost all the tractors and power tillers are operated by diesel engines. Diesel 
engines are used for operating irrigation pumps, flour mills, oil ghanis, cotton gins, chaff 
cutter, sugarcane crusher, threshers, winnowers etc. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
7 
 
 
 
 
Two stroke engine 
  
Two stroke engine 
(SI engine) 
Eighteen cylinder 
two stroke engine 
Four stroke Engine   + 
Pump 
 
  
Thresher Thresher 
   
 
 
Different types of tractors 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
8 
  
 
 
Tractor with dozer 
blade 
Power tiller Power tillers 
   ELECTRICAL POWER 
Electrical power is used mostly in the form of electrical motors on the farms. Motor is a very 
useful machine for farmers. It is clean, quest and smooth running. Its maintenance and 
operation needs less attention and care. The operating cost remains almost constant 
throughout its life. Electrical power is used for water pumping, diary industry, cold storage, 
farm product processing, fruit industry and many similar things. 
 
 
 
 
Electric motors Electric motors 
 
  
Electric motor + pump Chaff cutter Chaff cutter – motor driven 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
9 
RENEWABLE ENERGY 
It is the energy mainly obtained from renewable sources of energy like sun, wind, biomass etc. 
Biogas energy, wind energy and solar energy are used in agriculture and domestic purposes 
with suitable devices. Renewable energy can be used for lighting, cooking, water heating, 
space heating, water distillation, food processing, water pumping, and electric generation. This 
type of energy is inexhaustible in nature. 
 
 
  
Different applications of solar energy 
  
  
 
Solar electric panel Solar electric 
panel 
  
Grid connected solar energy 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
10 
 
 
  
Wind Farms 
  
 
 
 
  
Biogas plants 
  
 
Usage of renewable energy sources 
Solar energy- Solar dryers, lantern, cooker, solar still, solar refrigeration, solar lighting etc 
Wind energy- Water pumping, electricity generation etc. 
Biomass energy- Gasifiers to produce producer gas, pyrolysis to produce liquid fuels, Biogas 
etc 
Tidal energy – electricity generation 
Geothermal energy- Heat and electricity production 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
11 
 MERITS AND DEMERITS DIFFERENT FARM POWER SOUECES 
Merit Demerit 
      Human Power 
1. Easily available. 1. Costliest power compared to all other forms of 
power. 
2. Used for all types of work. 2. Very low efficiency. 
    3. Requires full maintenance when not in use. 
    4. Affected by weather condition and seasons. 
      Animal Power 
1. Easily available. 1. Not very efficient. 
2. Used for all types of work. 2. Seasons and weather affect the efficiency. 
3. Low initial investment. 3. Cannot work at a s tretch. 
4. Supplies manures to the field and fuels 
to farmers. 
4. Requires full maintenance when not in use. 
5. Lives on farm products. 5. Creates unhealthy and dirty atmosphere near 
the residence. 
    6. Very slow in doing work. 
        Mechanical Power 
1. Efficiency is high. 1. Initial capital investment high. 
2. Not affected by weather. 2. Fuel is costly. 
3. Cannot run at a stretch. 3. Repairs and maintenance needs technical 
knowledge. 
4. Requires less space.     
5. Cheaper form of power.     
         Electrical Power 
1. Very cheap form of power. 1. Initial capital investment high. 
2. High efficiency. 2. Requires good amount of technical knowledge. 
3. Can work at a stretch. 3. If handled carelessly, it causes great danger. 
4. Maintenance and operating cost is very 
low. 
    
5. Not affected by seasons.     
 
Concept of Farm Mechanization 
The main concept of farm mechanization is to apply the principles of engineering and 
technology to do the agricultural operations in a better way to increase crop yield. This 
includes the development, application and management of all mechanical aids for field 
operation, water control, material handling, storage and processing. Mechanical aids include 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
12 
hand tools, animal drawn implements, power tillers, tractors, engines, electric motors, grain 
processing and hauling equipments. 
SCOPE OF FARM MECHANIZATION 
Improved irrigation facilities, introduction of high yielding varieties. use of higher doses of 
fertilizers and pesticides have increased the scope for greater farm   mechanization  Farm 
mechanization helps for proper utilization of basic inputs like water, seed and fertilizer, 
optimum placement of the seed and fertilizer, ploughing, removal of weeds, leveling of 
uneven land and land reclamation. If machines are used  farmer and his animals are relieved 
of hard work. With the support of machines farmer can do his job better and quicker. He will 
get more leisure and devote his time to other works. He can earn better living. 
 
BENEFITS OF FARM MECHANIZATION 
1. Timeliness of operation 
2. Precision of operation 
3. Improvement of work environment. 
4. Enhancement of safety 
5. Reduction of drudgery of labour 
6. Reduction of loss of crops and food products 
7. Increased productivity of land 
8. Increased economic return to farmer 
9. Improved dignity of farmer 
10. Progress and prosperity in rural areas 
CONSTRAINTS IN FARM MECHANISATION (LIMITING FACTORS IN FARM 
MECHANIZATION) 
1. Small land holdings 
2. Less investing capacity of farmers 
3. Adequate availability of draft animals 
4. Lack of suitable farm machine for different operations 
5. Lack of repair and servicing facilities for machines 
6. Lack of trained man power 
7. Lack of coordination between research organization and manufacturer 
8. High cost of machines 
9. Inadequate quality control of machine 
QUESTIONS 
1. The cheapest source of energy is ------------------------ 
2. Power available from a farm labour is -------------------hp 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
13 
3. Solar energy is a ------------------------------ energy 
4. State the merits and demerits of different sources of energy used in farm 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
14 
 
 
Lecture 02 
TWO STROKE AND FOUR STROKE ENGINES, WORKING PRINCIPLES, 
APPLICATIONS - TYPES, POWER AND EFFICIENCY 
 
Heat engine is a machine for converting heat, developed by burning fuel into useful work. It 
can be said that heat engine is equipment which generates thermal energy and transforms it 
into mechanical energy.  
 
CLASSIFICATION OF HEAT ENGINES 
1.  Based on combustion of fuel: 
(i) External combustion engine (ii) Internal combustion engine. 
 
External combustion engine  
Here, the working medium, the steam, is generated in a boiler, located outside the engine and 
allowed in to the cylinder to operate the piston to do mechanical work.  
1. Internal combustion engine 
In internal combustion engine, the combustion of fuel takes place inside the engine cylinder 
and heat is generated within the cylinder. This heat is added to the air inside the cylinder and 
thus the pressure of the air is increased tremendously. This high pressure air moves the piston 
which rotates the crank shaft and thus mechanical work is done 
 
2. Based on fuel used 
1. Diesel engine 2. Petrol engine 3. Gas engine 
Diesel engine – Diesel is used as fuel 
Petrol engine – Petrol is used as fuel 
Gas engines – propane, butane or methane gases are used 
3.  Based ignition of fuel 
1. Spark ignition engine (Carburetor type  engines) 
2. Compression ignition engine ( injector type engines) 
Spark ignition engine – a mixture of air and fuel is drawn in to the engine cylinder. Ignition of 
fuel is done by using a spark plug. The spark plug produces a spark and ignites the air- fuel 
mixture. Such combustion is called constant volume combustion (C.V.C.). 
Compression ignition engine – In compression ignition engines air is compressed in to the 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
15 
engine cylinder,. Due to this the temperature of the compressed air rises to 700-900 C. At this 
stage diesel is sprayed in to the cylinder in fine particles. Due to a very high temperature, the 
fuel gets ignited. This type of combustion is called constant pressure combustion (CP.C.) 
because the pressure inside the cylinder is almost constant when combustion is taking place. 
4. Based on working cycle 
1. Four stroke cycle engine - When the cycle is completed in two revolutions of the 
crankshaft, it is called four stroke cycle engine. 
2. Two stroke cycle engine. - When the cycle is completed in one revolution of the 
crankshaft, it is called  two stroke cycle engine 
 CONSTRUCTION OF AN IC ENGINE 
I.C. engine converts the reciprocating motion of piston into rotary motion of the crankshaft by 
means of a connecting rod. The piston which reciprocating in the cylinder is very close fit in 
the cylinder. Rings are inserted in the circumferential grooves of the piston to prevent leakage 
of gases from sides of the piston. Usually a cylinder is bored in a cylinder block and a gasket, 
made of copper sheet or asbestos is inserted between the  cylinder and the cylinder head to 
avoid ant leakage. The combustion space is provided at the top of the cylinder head where 
combustion takes place. The connecting rod connects the piston and the crankshaft. The end of 
the connecting rod connecting the piston is called small end. A pin called gudgeon pin or wrist 
pin is provided for connecting the piston and the connecting rod at the small end. . The other 
end of the connecting rod connecting the crank shaft is called big end. When piston is moved 
up and down, the motion is transmitted to the crank shaft by the connecting rod and the crank 
shaft makes rotary motion. The crankshaft rotates in main bearings which are fitted the 
crankcase. A flywheel is provided at one end of the crankshaft for smoothing the uneven 
torque produced by the engine. There is an oil sump at the bottom of the engine which 
contains lubricating oil for lubricating different parts of the engine.  
 
WORKING PRINCIPLE OF I.C. ENGINE/ FOUR STROKE CYCLE ENGINE / TWO 
STROKE CYCLE ENGINE 
A mixture of fuel with correct amount of air is exploded in an engine cylinder which is closed 
at one end. As a result of this explosion, heat is released and this heat causes the pressure of 
the burning gases to increase. This pressure forces a close fitting piston to move down the 
cylinder. The movement of piston is transmitted to a crankshaft by a connecting rod so that the 
crankshaft rotates and turns a flywheel connected to it. Power is taken from the rotating crank 
shaft to do mechanical work. To obtain continuous rotation of the crankshaft the explosion has 
to be repeated continuously. Before the explosion to take place, the used gases are expelled 
from the cylinder, fresh charge of fuel and air are admitted in to the cylinder and the piston 
moved back to its starting position. The sequences of events taking place in an engine is called 
the working cycle of the engine. The sequence of events taking place inside the engine are as 
follows 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
16 
1. Admission of air or air-fuel mixture inside the engine cylinder ( suction ) 
2. Compression of the air or air fuel mixture inside the engine (compression) 
3. Injection of fuel in compressed air for ignition of the fuel or ignition of air-fuel mixture 
by an electric spark using a spark plug to produce thermal power inside the cylinder 
(power ) 
4. Removal of all the burnt gases from the cylinder to receive fresh charge ( exhaust) 
Note: Charge means admitting fresh air in to the cylinder in the case of compression  
           ignition engines ( diesel engines ) or admitting a mixture of air and fuel in to the  
           cylinder in the case of spark ignition engines. 
 
FOUR STROKE CYCLE ENGINE ( DIESEL/ PETROL ENGINE)  
In four stroke cycle engines the four events namely suction, compression, power and exhaust 
take place inside the engine cylinder. The four events are completed in four strokes of the 
piston (two revolutions of the crank shaft). This engine has got valves for controlling the inlet 
of charge and outlet of exhaust gases. The opening and closing of the valve is controlled by 
cams, fitted on camshaft. The camshaft is driven by crankshaft with the help of suitable gears 
or chains. The camshaft runs at half the speed of the crankshaft. The events taking place in I.C. 
engine are as follows: 
1. Suction stroke 2. Compression stroke 
3. Power stroke 4. Exhaust stroke 
 
 
    Four stroke cycle engine 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
17 
 
 
Four stroke cycle engine 
 
Suction stroke  
During suction stroke inlet valve opens and the piston moves downward. Only air or a 
mixture of air and fuel are drawn inside the cylinder. The exhaust valve remains in closed 
position during this stroke. The pressure in the engine cylinder is less than atmospheric 
pressure during this stroke (Fig. 1a) 
 
 
Compression stroke  
During this stroke the piston moves upward. Both valves are in closed position. The charge 
taken in the cylinder is compressed by the upward movement of piston. If only air is 
compressed, as in case of diesel engine, diesel is injected at the end of the compression stroke 
and ignition of fuel takes place due to high pressure and temperature of the compressed air. If 
a mixture of air and fuel is compressed in the cylinder, as in case of petrol engine, the mixture 
is ignited by a spark plug.  
 
Power stroke 
After ignition of fuel, tremendous amount of heat is generated, causing very high pressure in 
the cylinder which pushes the piston downward (Fig.1b). The downward movement of the 
piston at this instant is called power stroke. The connecting rod transmits the power from 
piston to the crank shaft and crank shaft rotates. Mechanical work can be taped at the rotating 
crank shaft. Both valves remain closed during power stroke. 
 
Exhaust stroke  
During this stroke piston moves upward. Exhaust valve opens and exhaust gases go out 
through exhaust valves opening. All the burnt gases go out of the engine and the cylinder 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
18 
becomes ready to receive the fresh charge. During this stroke inlet valve remains closed 
(Fig.1d). 
Thus it is found that out of four strokes, there is only one power stroke and three idle strokes 
in four stroke cycle engine. The power stroke supplies necessary momentum for useful work. 
 
TWO STROKE CYCLE ENGINE (PETROL ENGINE)  
In two stroke cycle engines, the whole sequence of events i.e., suction, compression, power 
and exhaust are completed in two strokes of the piston i.e. one revolution of the crankshaft. 
There is no valve in this type of engine. Gas movement takes place through holes called ports 
in the cylinder. The crankcase of the engine is air tight in which the crankshaft rotates. 
 
 Two stroke cycle 
Upward stroke of the piston (Suction + Compression)  
When the piston moves upward it covers two of the ports, the exhaust port and transfer port, 
which are normally almost opposite to each other. This traps the charge of air- fuel mixture 
drawn already in to the cylinder. Further upward movement of the piston compresses the 
charge and also uncovers the suction port. Now fresh mixture is drawn through this port into 
the crankcase. Just before the end of this stroke, the mixture in the cylinder is ignited by a 
spark plug (Fig 2 c &d). Thus, during this stroke both suction and compression events are 
completed. 
 
Downward stroke (Power + Exhaust)  
Burning of the fuel rises the temperature and pressure of the gases which forces the piston to 
move down the cylinder. When the piston moves down, it closes the suction port, trapping the 
fresh charge drawn into the crankcase during the previous upward stroke. Further downward 
movement of the piston uncovers first the exhaust port and then the transfer port. Now fresh 
charge in the crankcase moves in to the cylinder through the transfer port driving out the 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
19 
burnt gases through the exhaust port. Special shaped piston crown deflect the incoming 
mixture up around the cylinder so that it can help in driving out the exhaust gases . During the 
downward stroke of the piston power and exhaust events are completed.  
 
COMPARISON BETWEEN TWO STROKE AND FOUR STROKE ENGINES 
Four stroke engine Two stroke engine 
1. One power stroke for every two 
revolutions of the crankshaft. 
One power stroke for each revolution of the 
crankshaft. 
1. There are inlet and exhaust valves in the 
engine. 
There are inlet and exhaust ports instead of 
valves. 
1. Crankcase is not fully closed and air tight. 
Crankcase is fully closed and air tight. 
1. Top of the piston compresses the charge. 
Both sides of the piston compress the 
charge. 
1. Size of the flywheel is comparatively 
larger. 
Size of the flywheel is comparatively 
smaller. 
1. Fuel is fully consumed. 
Fuel is not fully consumed. 
1. Weight of engine per hp is high. Weight of engine per hp is comparatively 
low. 
1. Thermal efficiency is high. 
Thermal efficiency is comparatively low. 
1. Removal or exhaust gases easy. 
Removal of exhaust gases comparatively 
difficult. 
1. Torque produced is even. 
Torque produced is less even. 
1. For a given weight, engine would give only 
half the power of two stroke engine. 
For same weight, two stroke engine gives 
twice the power that of four stroke engine. 
1. All types of speed are possible (high and 
low). 
Mostly high speed engines are there. 
1. It can be operated in one direction only. 
It can be operated in both direction 
(clockwise and counter clockwise). 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
20 
WORKING PRINCIPLE OF DIESEL ENGINE  
The basic components of diesel engine are cylinder, piston, injector, valves, connecting rod and 
crankshaft. In diesel engines only  air is drawn into the cylinder. The engine has high 
compression ratio hence the air in the cylinder attains very high temperature and pressure at 
the end of the compression stroke. At the end of the compression stroke, the fuel is sprayed 
into the cylinder in atomized form using injectors. Due to high temperature, the fuel gets 
ignited, begins to burn and produce lot of heat. Due to the heat the gases expand, move the 
piston downward and rotate the crank shaft. The torque available at the rotating crank shaft is 
used to do any mechanical work 
Special features of diesel engine 
1. Engine has high compression ratio ranging from 14:1 to 22:1. 
2. During compression stroke, the engine attains high pressure ranging from 30 to 45 
kg/cm2 and high temperature of about 500°C. 
3. At the end of the compression stroke, fuel is injected into the cylinder through injectors 
(atomizers) at a very high pressure ranging from 120 to 200 kg/cm2. 
4. Ignition takes place due to heat of compression only. 
5. There is no external spark in diesel engine. 
6. Diesel engine has better slogging or lugging ability i.e. it maintains higher torque for a 
longer duration of time at a lower speed. 
COMPARISON OF DIESEL ENGINE WITH PETROL ENGINE 
Diesel engine petrol engine 
It has got no carburetor, ignition coil and spark 
plug. 
It has got carburetor, ignition coil & spark 
plug. 
Its compression ratio varies from 14:1 to 22:1 Its compression ratio varies from 5:1 to 8:1. 
It uses diesel oil as fuel. 
It uses petrol (gasoline) or power kerosine as 
fuel. 
Only air is sucked in cylinder in suction stroke. 
Mixture of fuel and air is sucked in the 
cylinder in suction stroke. 
It has got „fuel injection pump‟ and injector 
It has got no fuel injection pump and 
injector, instead it has got carburetor and 
ignition coil. 
Fuel is injected in combustion chamber where 
burning of fuel takes places due to heat of 
compression. 
Air fuel mixture is compressed in the 
combustion chamber when it is ignited by 
an electric spark. 
Thermal efficiency varies from 32 to 38% Thermal efficiency varies from 25 to 32% 
Engine weight per horse-power is high. 
Engine weight per horsepower is 
comparatively low. 
Operating cost is low. Operating cost is high. 
Compression pressure inside the cylinder varies Compression pressure varies from 6 to 10 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
21 
from 35 to 45 kg/cm2 and temperature is about 
500°C. 
kg/cm2 and temperature is above 260°C. 
 
ENGINE COMPONENTS  
Internal combustion engine consists of a number of parts which are given below : 
1. Cylinder: It is a part of the engine which confines the expanding gases and forms the 
combustion space. It is the basic part of the engine. It provides space in which piston 
operates to suck the air or air-fuel mixture. The piston compresses the charge and the 
gas is allowed to expand in the cylinder, transmitting power for useful work. Cylinders 
are usually made of high grade cast iron. 
2. Cylinder block: It is the solid casting body which includes the cylinder and water 
jackets (cooling fins in the air cooled engines). 
3. Cylinder head: It is a detachable portion of an engine which covers the cylinder and 
includes the combustion chamber, spark plugs or injector and valves. 
4. Cylinder liner or sleeve: It is a cylindrical lining either wet or dry type which is 
inserted in the cylinder block in which the piston slides. Liners are classified as : (1) Dry 
liner and (2) Wet liner. 
Dry liner makes metal to metal contact with the cylinder block casing.  wet liners come 
in contact with the cooling water, whereas dry liners do not come in contact with the 
cooling water. 
5. Piston: It is a cylindrical part closed at one end which maintains a close sliding fit in the 
engine cylinder. It is connected to the connecting rod by a piston pin. The force of the 
expanding gases against the closed end of the piston, forces the piston down in the 
cylinder. This causes the connecting rod to rotate the crankshaft (Fig 3). Cast iron is 
chosen due to its high compressive strength. Aluminum and its alloys preferred mainly 
due to it lightness. 
1. Due to it lightness. 
 
Engine components 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
22 
Head (Crown) of piston: It is the top of the piston. 
Skirt: It is that portion of the piston below the piston pin which is designed to adsorb the side 
movements of the piston. 
1. Piston ring: It is a split expansion ring, placed in the groove of the piston. They are 
usually made of cast iron or pressed steel alloy (Fig.3). The function of the ring are as 
follows : 
2. It forms a gas tight combustion chamber for all positions of piston. 
3. It reduces contact area between cylinder wall and piston wall preventing friction losses 
and excessive wear. 
4. It controls the cylinder lubrication. 
5. It transmits the heat away from the piston to the cylinder walls. 
Piston rings are of two types: (1) Compression ring and (2) Oil ring 
vii) Compression ring  
Compression rings are usually plain, single piece and are always placed in the grooves of the 
piston nearest to the piston head. They prevent leakage of gases from the cylinder and helps 
increasing compression pressure inside the cylinder.   
Oil ring: Oil rings are grooved or slotted and are located either in lowest groove above the 
piston pin or in a groove above the piston skirt. They control the distribution of lubrication oil 
in the cylinder and the piston. 
 Piston Pin: It is also called wrist pin or gudgeon pin. Piston pin is used to join the connecting 
rod to the piston.  
viii) Connecting rod: It is special type of rod, one end of which is attached to the piston and 
the other end to the crankshaft (Fig.3). It transmits the power of combustion to the crankshaft 
and makes it rotate continuously. It is usually made of drop forged steel. 
ix) Crankshaft: It is the main shaft of an engine which converts the reciprocating motion of the 
piston into rotary motion of the flywheel (Fig.3). Usually the crankshaft is made of drop forged 
steel or cast steel. The space that supports the crankshaft in the cylinder block is called main 
journal, whereas the part to which co nnecting rod is attached is known as crank journal. 
Crankshaft is provided with counter weights throughout its length to have counter balance of 
the unit.  
x) Flywheel: Flywheel is made of cast iron. Its main functions are as follows : 
1. It stores energy during power stroke and returns back the energy during the idle 
strokes, providing a uniform rotary motion of flywheel. 
2. The rear surface of the flywheel serves as one of the pressure surfaces for the clutch 
plate. 
3. Engine timing marks are usually stamped on the flywheel, which helps in adjusting the 
timing of the engine. 
4. Sometime the flywheel serves the purpose of a pulley for transmitting power. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
23 
Crankcase: The crankcase is that part of the engine which supports and encloses the 
crankshaft and camshaft. It provides a reservoir for the lubricating oil. It also serves as a 
mounting unit for such accessories as the oil pump, oil filter,, starting motor and ignition 
components. The upper portion of the crankcase is usually integral with cylinder block. The 
lower part of the crankcase is commonly called oil pan and is usually made of cast iron or cast 
aluminum. 
Camshaft: It is a shaft which raises and lowers the inlet and exhaust valves at proper times. 
Camshaft is driven by crankshaft by means of gears, chains or sprockets (Fig3). The speed of 
the camshaft is exactly half the speed of the crankshaft in four stroke engine. Camshaft 
operates the ignition timing mechanism, lubricating oil pump and fuel pump. It is mounted in 
the crankcase, parallel to the crankshaft. 
Timing gear: Timing gear is a combination of gears, one gear of which is mounted at one end 
of the camshaft and the other gear at the crankshaft. Camshaft gear (fig. ) is bigger in size than 
that of the crankshaft gear and it has twice as many teeth as that of the crankshaft gear. For 
this reason, this gear is commonly called half time gear. Timing gear controls the timing of 
ignition, timing of opening and closing of valve as well as fuel injection timing. 
Inlet manifold: It is that part of the engine through which air or air-fuel mixture enters into 
the engine cylinder. It is fitted by the side of the cylinder head. 
Exhaust manifold: It is that part of the engine through which exhaust gases go out of the 
engine cylinder. It is capable of withstanding high temperature of burnt gases. It is fitted by 
the side of the cylinder head. 
xiv) Top dead centre - When the piston is at the top of its stroke, it is said to be at the top dead 
centre (TDC),  
xv) Bottom dead centre - when the piston is at the bottom of its stroke, it is said to be at its 
bottom dead centre (BDC). 
 In two stroke cycle engine both the sides of the piston are effective which is not the case in 
four stroke cycle engine. 
xvi) Scavenging  
The process of removal of burnt or exhaust gases from the engine cylinder is known as 
scavenging. Entire burnt gases do not go out in normal stroke, hence some type of blower or 
compressor is used to remove the exhaust gases in two stroke cycle engine. 
TERMINOLOGY CONNECTED WITH ENGINE POWER  
Bore- Bore is the diameter of the engine cylinder. 
Stroke - It is the linear distance traveled by the piston from Top dead centre (TDC) to Bottom 
dead centre (BDC). 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
24 
Stroke-bore ratio -The ratio of length of stroke (L) and diameter of bore (D) of the cylinder is 
called stroke-bore ratio (L/D). In general, this ratio varies between 1 to 1.45 and for tractor 
engines, this ratio is about 1.25. 
Swept volume - It is the volume (A x L) displaced by one stroke of the piston where A is the 
cross sectional area of piston and L is the length of stroke (Fig.4). 
 
 
Bore and stroke of IC engine 
Compression ratio - It is the ratio of the volume of the cylinder  at the beginning of the 
compression stroke to that at the end of compression stroke, i.e. ratio of total cylinder volume 
to clearance volume. 
The Compression ratio of diesel engine varies from 14:1 to 22:1 and that of carburetor type 
engine (spark ignition engine) varies from 4:1 to 8:1. 
 
Power - It is the rate of doing work. S.I. unit of power is watt. 
Watt = Joule/sec. (4.2 Joules = 1 Calorie). 
 In metric unit the power can be expressed in kg.m/sec. 
 
Horse power (HP ) - It is the rate of doing work. Expressed in horse power 
Conversion factors from work to power 
4500 kg m of work /minute = 1.0 hp 
 75 kg. m of work    /second = 1.0 hp. 
 
Indicated horse power (IHP) - It is the power generated in the engine cylinder and received 
by the piston. It is the power developed in a cylinder without accounting frictional losses. 
PLAN           n 
IHP = ---------    x  ---  (for four stroke engine) 
4500           2 
PLAN       
IHP = --------- x n (for two stroke engine) 
4500     
Where P = mean effective pressure, kg/cm2 
L = stroke length, m 
A = cross sectional area of piston, cm2 
N = engine revolution per minute 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
25 
n = number of cylinders 
In SI unit, indicated horse power is given as below: 
PLAN         n    
Indicated horse power (IHP), kW = ------------- x ---- (for four strike engine) 
60 x 1012     2 
PLAN           
Indicated power (ip), kW = ------------- x n (for two strike engine) 
60 x 1012    
where P = mean effective pressure, Pa (pascal) 
L = length of stroke, mm 
A = area of piston, mm2 
N = speed, RPM 
 
Brake horse power (BHP) - It is the power delivered by the engine at the end of the crankshaft. 
It is measured by a dynamometer. 
  2ΠNT 
 BHP = ----------- hp 
  4500 
    where T = Torque in kg.m 
N = speed, RPM 
Belt horse power - It is the power of the engine measured at a pulley receiving drive from the 
PTO shaft of the tractor. 
Power take-off horse power (PTO HP) - It is the power delivered by a tractor through its PTO 
shaft. In general, the belt and PTO horse power of a tractor will approximately be the same. 
The PTO hp is around 80-85% 0f tractor engine power 
Drawbar horse power (DBHP) - It is the power of a tractor measured at the drawbar of a 
tractor. It is that power which is available for pulling loads. It is around 50-55 % of engine 
power. 
Frictional horse power (FHP) - It is the power required to run the engine at a given speed 
without producing any useful work. It represents the friction and pumping losses of an 
engine. 
IHP = BHP + FHP 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
26 
MODEL QUESTIONS 
1. List the advantages of diesel engine 
2. Mention the basic components of an IC Engine 
3. List the types of engine classification 
4. Mention the four strokes  of IC engine with a neat sketch and explain their role 
5. Differentiate  petrol and diesel engine 
6. Mention merits and demerits of different farm power sources. 
7. Differentiate IHP and BHP 
8. Write about the working of four stroke cycle engine 
9. Write about the working of two stroke cycle engine 
10. Compare four stroke cycle engine with two stroke cycle engine 
11. Compare spark ignition  engine with compression engine 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
27 
 
 
Lecture 03 
DIFFERENT SYSTEMS OF IC ENGINE – COOLING, LUBRICATING, FUEL 
INJECTION SYSTEMS 
 
Different systems available for efficient functioning of an engine are as follows 
1. fuel supply system 
2. lubrication system 
3. ignition system 
4. cooling system 
5. governor 
Fuel is a substance consumed by the engine to produce power. The common fuel for Internal 
Combustion engines are 
1. Petrol 
2. Power kerosene 
3. High speed diesel 
Calorific value of fuel 
The heat liberated by combustion of a fuel is known as calorific value or heat value of the fuel. 
It is expressed in kcal/kg of the fuel 
Sl. No Name of fuel Calorific value, kcal/kg 
1 Light Diesel Oil (L.D.O) 10300 
2 High speed diesel oil (HSD) 10550 
3 Power kerosene 10850 
4 Petrol 11100 
 
FUEL SUPPLY SYSTEM IN SPARK IGNITION ENGINE 
The fuel supply system of spark ignition engine consists of 
1. Fuel tank  
2. Sediment bowl 
3. Fuel lift pump  
4. Carburetor 
5. Fuel pipes 
In some spark ignition engines the fuel tank is placed above the level of the carburetor. The 
fuel flows from fuel tank to the carburetor under the action of gravity. There are one or two 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
28 
filters between fuel tank and carburetor. A transparent sediment bowl is also provided to hold 
the dust and dirt of the fuel. If the tank is below the level of carburetor, a lift pump is provided 
in between the tank and the carburetor for forcing fuel from tank to the carburetor of the 
engine. The fuel comes from fuel tank to sediment bowl and then to the lift pump. From there 
the fuel goes to the carburetor through suitable pipes. From carburetor the fuel goes to the 
engine cylinder through inlet manifold of the engine. 
 
Carburetor 
The process of preparing air-fuel mixture away from the engine cylinder is called carburetion. 
and the device in which this process takes is called carburetor. 
Functions of carburetor 
1. To mix the air and fuel thoroughly 
2. To atomize the fuel 
3. To regulate the air- fuel ratio at different speeds and loads on the engine. 
4. to supply correct amount of mixture at different speeds and loads 
FUEL SUPPLY SYSTEM IN DIESEL ENGINE 
Fuel supply system of diesel engine consists of the following components 
1. Fuel tank 
2. Fuel lift pump or fuel feed pump 
3. Fuel filter 
4. Fuel injection pump 
5. High pressure pipe 
6. Over flow valve 
7. Fuel injector 
Fuel is drawn from fuel tank by fuel feed pump and forced to injection pump through fuel 
filter. The injection pump supplies high pressure fuel to injection nozzles through delivery 
valves and high pressure pipes. Fuel is injected into the combustion chamber through injection 
nozzles. The fuel that leaks out from the injection nozzles passes out through leakage pipe and 
returns to the fuel tank through the over flow pipe. 
Over flow valve installed at the top of the filter keeps the feed pressure under specified limit. If 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
29 
the feed pressure exceeds the specified limit , the over flow valve opens and then the excess 
fuel returns to fuel tank through over flow pipe. 
 
 
Fuel tank 
It is a storage tank for diesel. A wire gauge strainer is provided under the cap to prevent 
foreign particles entering the tank. 
 
Fuel lift pump 
It trans fers fuel from fuel tank to inlet gallery of fuel injection pump 
 
Preliminary filter (sedimen t bowl assembly) 
This filter is mostly fitted on fuel lift pump. It prevents foreign materials from reaching inside 
he fuel line. It consists of a glass cap with a gasket. 
 
Fuel filter 
Mostly two stage filters are used in diesel engines 
1. Primary filter    2. Secondary filter 
Primary filter removes course materials, water and dust. Secondary filter removes fine dust 
particles. 
 
Fuel injection pump  
It is a high pressure pump which supplies fuel to the injectors according to the firing order of 
the engine. It is used to create pressure varying from 120 kg/cm2 to 300 kg/cm2. It supplies 
the required quantity of fuel to each cylinder at appropriate time. 
 
Air venting of fuel system  
When air has entered the fuel lines or suction chamber of the injection pump, venting should 
be done properly.. Air is removed by the priming pump through the bleeding holes of the 
injection pump. 
 
Fuel injector  
It is the component which delivers finely atomized fuel under high pressure to combustion 
chamber of the engine. Modern tractor engines use fuel injectors which have multiple holes. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
30 
Main parts of injectors are nozzle body, and needle valve. The needle valve is pressed against 
a conical seat in the nozzle body by a spring. The injection pressure is adjusted by adjusting a 
screw. In operation, fuel from injection pump enters the nozzle body through high pressure 
pipe. When fuel pressure becomes so high that it exceeds the set spring pressure, the needle 
valve lifts off its seat. The fuel is forced out of the nozzle spray holes into the combustion 
chamber. 
 
LUBRICATION SYSTEM 
IC engine is made of moving parts. Duo to continuous movement of two metallic surfaces over 
each other, there is wearing of moving parts, generation of heat and loss of power in engine. 
Lubrication of moving parts is essential to prevent all these harmful effects. 
 
Purpose of lubrication- 
1. Reducing frictional effect 
2. Cooling effect 
3. Sealing effect 
4. Cleaning effect 
Types of lubricants 
Lubricants are obtained from animal fat, vegetables and minerals. Vegetable lubricants are 
obtained from seeds, fruits and plants. Cotton seed oil, olive oil, linseed oil, caster oil are used 
as lubricants. Mineral lubricants are most popular for engines and machines. It is obtained 
from crude petroleum found in nature.. Petroleum lubricants are less expensive and suitable 
for internal combustion engines 
Engine lubrication system 
The lubricating system of an engine is an arrangement of mechanisms which maintains the 
supply of lubricating oil to the rubbing surfaces of an engine at correct pressure and 
temperature. 
The parts which require lubrication are 
1. Cylinder walls and piston] 
2. Piston pin 
3. crankshaft and connecting rod bearings 
4. Camshaft bearings 
5. Valve operating mechanism 
6. Cooling fan 
7. Water pump and 
8. Ignition mechanism 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
31 
Types of lubricating systems 
1. Splash system 
2. Forced feed system 
IGNITION SYSTEM 
Fuel mixture of IC engine must be ignited in the engine cylinder at proper time for useful 
work.  Arrangement of different components for providing ignition at proper time in the 
engine cylinder is called Ignition system 
Types of ignition systems 
1. Ignition by electric spark or spark ignition 
2. Ignition by heat of compression or compression ignition 
3. Ignition by hot tube or hot bulb 
4. Ignition by open fire 
Only the first two are important methods for modern engines 
 
SPARK IGNITION 
the purpose of spark ignition is to deliver a perfectly timed surge of electricity across an open 
gap in each cylinder at the exact moment so that the charge may start burning with maximum 
efficiency 
Two types of spark ignition are a) Battery ignition b) magneto ignition 
 
MAGNETO IGNITION SYSTEM 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
32 
In magneto ignition system a magneto is used to generate electric current for producing spark. 
A high tension magneto generates a very high voltage needed for spark plug 
 
Main components of magneto ignition system 
a) Frame   b) Permanent magnet 
c) Armature   d) Soft iron field 
e) rotor   f) Primary and secondary winding 
g) Breaker points  h) Condenser 
The armature consists of an iron core on which there are two sets of windings  
1) Primary    2) Secondary 
The armature is driven by the engine. As the armature rotates, primary windings cut the lines 
of force of magnetic field and induced current flows in the primary circuit. As the primary 
current reaches its maximum value in each direction, the primary circuit is suddenly opened 
by a contact breaker and the current collapses. This action induces a very high voltage in the 
secondary winding which causes a momentary spark to jump at the spark plug gap. A 
distributor is provided which carries current to the spark plug through high tension wires. The 
condenser is used to eliminate the arching at the breaker points and intensifying the current in 
the secondary circuit. For multi cylinder engines, a distributor and a rotor are required to 
distribute the current to different spark plugs. 
 
 
Magneto ignition system Magneto ignition system 
 
COOLING SYSTEM 
Fuel is burnt inside the cylinder of an internal combustion engine to produce power. The 
temperature produced on the power stroke of an engine can be as high as 1600 ºC  and this is 
greater than melting point of engine parts.. The best operating temperature of IC engines lie 
between 140 F and 200  ºF and hence cooling of an IC engine is highly essential. . It is estimated 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
33 
that about 40% of total heat produced is passed to atmosphere via exhaust, 30% is removed by 
cooling and about 30% is used to produce power. 
Purpose of cooling 
1. To maintain optimum temperature of engine for efficient operation under all 
conditions. 
2. To dissipate surplus heat for protection of engine components like cylinder, cylinder 
head, piston, piston rings, and valves 
3. To maintain the the lubricating property of oil inside engine 
Methods of cooling 
1. Air cooled system 
2. Water cooled system 
AIR COOLING SYSTEM 
Air cooled engines are those engines in which heat is conducted from the working components 
of the engine to the atmosphere directly. 
Principle of air cooling- The cylinder of an air cooled engine has fins to increase the area of 
contact of air for speedy cooling. The cylinder is normally enclosed in a sheet metal casing 
called cowling. The fly wheel has blades projecting from its face, so that it acts like a fan 
drawing air through a hole in the cowling and directed it around the finned cylinder. For 
maintenance of air cooled system, passage of air is kept clean by removing grasses etc. by a 
stiff brush of compressed air. 
Advantages of air cooled engine 
1. It is simple in design and construction 
2. Water jackets, radiators, water pump, thermostat, pipes, hoses are not required 
3. It is more compact 
4. Lighter in weight 
Disadvantages 
1. There is uneven cooling of engine parts 
2. Engine temperature is generally high during working period 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
34 
 
Air cooled engine 
 
WATER COOLING SYSTEM 
Engines using water as cooling medium are called water cooled engines. Water is circulated 
round the cylinders to absorb heat from the cylinder walls. The heated water is conducted 
through a radiator to remove the heat and cool the water. 
 
Methods of water cooling 
1. Open jacket or hopper method 
2. Thermo siphon method 
3. Forced circulation method 
1. Open jacket method 
There is a hopper or jacket containing water which surrounds the engine cylinder. So long as 
the hopper contains water the engine continues to operate satisfactorily. As soon as the water 
starts boiling it is replaced by cold water.. The hopper is large enough to run for several hours 
without refilling. A drain plug is provided in a low accessible position for draining water as 
and when required. 
2. Thermo siphon method 
It consists of a radiator, water jacket, fan, temperature gauge and hose connections. The system 
is based on the principle that heated water which surrounds the cylinder becomes lighter and 
it rises upwards in liquid column. Hot water goes to the radiator where it passes through tubes 
surrounded by air. Circulation of water takes place due to the reason that water jacket and 
radiator are connected at both sides i.e. at top and bottom. A fan is driven with the help of a V 
belt to suck air through tubes of the radiator unit, cooling radiator water. The disadvantage of 
the system is that circulation of water is greatly reduced by accumulation of scale or foreign 
matter in the passage and consequently causing over heating of the engine. 
3. Forced Circulation system 
In this method, a water pump is used to force water from radiator to the water jacket of the 
engine. After circulating the entire run of water jacket, water comes back to the radiator where 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
35 
it loses its heat by the process of radiation. To maintain the correct engine temperature , a 
thermostat valve is placed at the outer end of cylinder head. Cooling liquid is by-passed 
through the water jacket of th3e engine until the engine attains the desired temperature. The 
thermostat valve opens and the by-pass is closed, allowing the water to go to the radiator. The 
system consists of the following components 
1. Water pump   2. Radiator 
3. Fan     4. Fan-belt 
5. Water jacket   6. Thermostat valve 
7. Temperature gauge  8. Hose pipe 
Water pump 
It is a centrifugal pump. It draws the cooled water from bottom of the radiator and delivers it 
to the water jackets surrounding the engine. 
Thermostat valve 
It is a control valve used in cooling system to control the flow of water when activated by a 
temperature signal. 
Fan 
The fan is mounted on the water pump shaft. It is driven by the same belt that drives the 
pump and dynamo. The purpose of radiator is to provide strong draft of air through the 
radiator to improve engine cooling 
Water jacket - Water jackets are passages cored out around the engine cylinder as well as 
around the valve opening 
 
 
Forced Circulation cooling system- Water 
cooled engine 
Forced Circulation cooling system- Water 
cooled engine 
GOVERNOR 
Governor is mechanical device, designed to control the soeed of the engine with in specified 
limit., used on tractor or stationary engine for 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
36 
1. Maintaining a nearly constant speed of engine  under different load conditions 
2. Protecting the engine and attached equipments against high speeds, when the 
load is removed or reduced 
Types of governors 
1. Centrifugal governor 
2. Pneumatic governor 
3. Hydraulic governor 
Governor regulation 
The governor is fited on an engine for maintaining a constant speeed , even then some 
variation in speed is observed at full load and no load conditions. In normal working , a 
variation of about 100 rev/min is observed between full load and noload conditions for a good 
governor. Hence it is possible to regulate the governor to maintain a higher or lower speed by 
changing the tension of the spring . The extent of regulatyion done , is expressed inbterms of 
percentage called percentage regulation. This is also called speed drop. It is the variation in the 
engine speed between full load and no load condition. It is usually expressed as percentage of 
rated speed. This is given by 
      N1 – N2 
R =  ------------------  X 100 
   ( N1 + N2 )/2 
Where , 
R –  %  regulation,  
N1 – Speed at no load, rpm 
N2 – Speed at full load, rpm 
Problem- Find the percentage regulation in a governor if speed at no load is 1600 rev/min and 
at full load is 1500 rev/min 
Governor hunting 
Governor hunting is the erratic variation of the speed of the governor when it over 
compensates for speed changes. When the governor produces a periodic effect on the engine 
speed like too fast and then too slow, then too fast and so on it is a sign of governor hunting. In 
such cases it is observed that when the engine speeds up quickly, the governor suddenly 
responds, the speed drops quickly, the governor again responds and this process is repeated. 
The reason for governor hunting may be due to incorrect adjustment of fuel pump or 
carburetor, improper adjustment of the idling screw and excessive friction. Hunting may be 
due to governor being too stiff or due to some obstruction in free movement of governor 
components. 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
37 
 
 
Lecture 04  
TRACTORS- TYPES AND UTILITIES 
 
Tractor is a self propelled power unit having wheels or tracks for  operating agricultural 
implements and machines including trailers. Tractor engine is used as a prime mover for 
active tools and stationary farm machinery through power-take off (pto) or belt pulley 
 
 
wheel tractors 
TRACTOR DEVELOPMENT 
The present tractor is the result of gradual development of machine in different stages. History 
of tractor development is given below. 
1890- The word tractor appeared first on record in a patent issued on a tractor or traction 
engine invented by George H. Harris of Chicago 
1906- Successful gasoline tractor was introduced by Charles w. Hart and Charles H. Parr of 
Charles City, Iowa 
1908- First Winnipeg tractor trails were held 
1911- First tractor demonstration was held at Omaha ( Nebraska) 
1915-1919- Power take off was introduced 
1920-1924- All purpose was developed 
1936- 1937 – Diesel engine was used in tractor and pneumatic tires were introduced 
1950-1960- Manufacturing of diesel tractors on extensive basis throughout the world was taken 
up 
1960-1961 – Tractor manufacturing was started in India by first manufacturer M/s Eicher 
Good Earth 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
38 
1962-1970 – Manufacturers like Tractor and Farm Equipment , Madras , Hindustan tractors at 
Baroda, Escorts Tractors at Faridabad and International Harvester in Bombay started work 
during this period 
1971- Escorts Tractor Ltd. Started producing Ford Tractors 
1973- Manufacture of HMT Tractor was started 
1974-  Manufacture of Pitti and Kirlosker  Tractor was started 
1975- Harsha Tractors was established 
1981- Auto tractors were started 
1982- Universal Tractors was established 
1983-2003- GTCL tractors, M.M Tractors, Sonalika, VST, L&T, Bajaj Tractors were produced 
CLASSIFICATION OF TRACTORS 
Tractors can be classified into three classes on the basis of structural design 
1. Wheel tractor 
2. crawler tractor 
3. walking type tractor 
Wheel tractor 
Tractors having three or four pneumatic wheels are called wheel tractors. Four wheel tractors 
are popular everywhere 
 
 
Three wheel tractor Four wheel tractor 
 
Crawler tractor 
This type is also called Track type tractor or Chain type tractor. In such tractors , there is 
endless chain or track in place of pneumatic wheels 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
39 
   
Crawler tractors 
 
Power tiller 
Power tiller is a walking type tractor. This tractor is usually fitted with two wheels only. The 
direction of travel and its controls for field operation is performed by the operator, walking 
behind the tractor 
 
  
Power tillers 
 
Classification of wheel tractors 
On the basis of purpose, wheeled tractors are classified into three groups 
a. General purpose tractor b. Row crop tractor  
c. Special purpose tractor 
 
a) General purpose tractor 
It is used for major farm operations such as ploughing, sowing, harvesting and transporting 
works. Such tracto rs have i) low ground clearance ii)Increased engine power iii) good 
adhesion and iv) wide tyres 
 
  
      General purpose tractors 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
40 
b) Row crop tractors 
It is used for row crop cultivation. Such tractor is provided with replaceable driving wheels of 
different tread widths. It has high ground clearance to save damage of crops. Wide wheel track 
can be adjusted to suit inter row distance 
 
   
Row crop tractors 
 
c) Special purpose tractor 
It is used for definite jobs like cotton fields, marshy lands, hill sides, garden etc. special designs 
are there for special purpose tractor. 
Eg. a) Tractor with winch unit b) multi drive tractor c) tractor for golf grounds etc. 
  
 
Tractor with winch unit Multi drive tractors Tractor for golf grounds 
 
SELECTION OF TRACTOR 
Selection of tractors depend up on following factors 
1. Land holding: Under a single cropping pattern, it is normally recommended to 
consider 1 hp for every 2 hectare of land. In other words , one tractor 20-25 hp is 
suitable for 40 hectare farm 
2. Cropping pattern: Generally 1.5 hectare/hp has been recommended where adequate 
irrigation facility are available and more than one crop is taken. So a 30-35 hp tractor is 
suitable for 40 hectare of land. 
3. Soil condition: A tractor with less wheel base , higher ground clearance and low overall 
weight may work successfully in lighter soils buy will not be able to give sufficient 
depth in black cotton soils 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
41 
4. Climatic condition: For very hot zone and desert area, air cooled engines are preferred 
over water cooled engines. Similarly for higher altitude air cooled engines are preferred 
because water cooled engines are liable to be frozen at high altitudes 
5. Repair facilities: It should be ensured that the tractor to be purchased has a dealer at 
near by place with all the technical skills for repair and maintenance of the machine. 
6. Running cost: Tractors with less specific fuel consumption should be preferred over 
others so that the running cost may be less. 
7. Initial cost and resale value: While keeping the resale value in mind , the initial cost 
should not be very high, otherwise higher amount of interest have to be paid 
Test report: Test report of tractors released from farm machinery testing stations should be 
consulted for guidance 
WHEEL TRACTOR  
Components 
1. I.C Engine 
2. Clutch 
3. Transmission gears 
4. Differential unit 
5. Final drive 
6. Real wheel 
7. Front wheels 
8. Steering mechanism 
9. Hydraulic control and hitch system 
10. Brakes 
11. Power-take-off unit 
12. Tractor pulley 
13. Draw bar and 
14. Control panel 
15. I.C engine 
Internal combustion of suitable horse power is used as a prime mover in a tractor. Engines 
ranging from 8 to 200 hp are used in agricultural tractors.  In India , four wheel tractors for 
agricultural operations are fitted with 25-80 hp. Walking type tractors are fitted with 8-12 hp 
engines 
1. Clutch 
Clutch is a device, used to connect and disconnect the tractor engine from the transmission 
gears and drive wheels. Clutch transmits power by means of friction between driving 
members and driven members 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
42 
Necessity of clutch in a tractor 
1. Engine needs cranking by any suitable device. For easy cranking, the engine is 
disconnected from the rest of the transmission unit by the clutch. After starting the 
starting the engine, the clutch is engaged to transmit the power from engine to gear box 
2. In order to change the gears, the gear box must be kept free from engine power, 
otherwise the gear teeth will be damaged and engagement of gears will be difficult. 
This work is done by clutch 
3. When the belt pulley of the tractor works in the field it needs to be stopped with out 
stopping the engine. This is done by a clutch 
3. Power transmission system of a tractor)  
Transmission is a speed reducing mechanism, equipped with several gears. It may be called a 
sequence of gears and shafts, through which the engine power is transmitted to the tractor 
wheels. The system consists of various devices, which cause forward and backward movement 
of tractor to suit different field conditions. The complete path of power from engine to wheel is 
called power train 
Functions of power transmission system 
1. To transmit power from the engine to the rear wheels of the tractor 
2. To make reduced speed available, to rear wheels of the tractor 
3. To alter the ratio of wheel speed and engine speed in order to suit the field conditions 
4. To transmit power through right angle drive, because the crankshaft and rear axle are 
normally at right angles to each other. 
The power transmission system consists of : 
1. Clutch    2. Transmission gears 
3. Differential   4. Final drive 
5. Rear axle    6. Rear wheels 
4. Transmission gears 
A tractor runs at high speed, but the rear wheel of the tractor requires power at low speed and 
high torque. That‟s why it becomes essential to reduce the engine speed and increase the 
torque available at the rear wheel of the tractor because  
   2ΠNT  
Power,   kW =  ------------ 
60 X 1000 
Where,  
T is torque in Newton –meter 
N = speed in rev/min 
If engine power is constant, it is obvious that for higher torque at wheels , low speed is 
required and vice versa.. So gear box is fitted between engine and rear wheels for variable 
speed and torque. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
43 
1. Differential unit 
Differential unit is a special arrangement of gears to permit one of the rear wheels of the 
tractor to rotate slower or faster than the other. While turning the tractor on a curved path, the 
inner wheel has to travel lesser distance than the outer wheel. The inner wheel requires lesser 
power than the outer wheel. This condition is fulfilled by differential unit, which permits one 
of the rear wheels of the tractor to move faster than the other at a turning point.  
Differential Lock 
Differential lock is a device to join both half axles of the tractor so that even if one wheel is less 
resistance , the tractor comes out of the mud etc. as both wheels move with the same speed 
and apply equal traction. 
1. Final drive 
Final drive is a gear reduction unit in the power trains between differentials and drive wheels. 
Final drive transmits the power finally to the rear axle and the wheels. The tractor rear wheels 
are not directly attached to the half shafts but the drive is taken through a pair of spur gears. 
Each half shaft terminates in a small gear which meshes with a large gear called bull gear. The 
bull gear is mounted on a shaft, carrying the tractor rear wheel. The device for final speed 
reduction, suitable for tractor rear wheels is known as final drive mechanism. 
1. Steering mechanism 
The system, governing the angular movement of front wheels of a tractor is called steering 
system. This system minimizes the efforts of the operator in turning the front wheels with the 
application of leverages. The different components of steering system are i)steering wheel ii) 
steering shaft iii)steering gear iv0 drag link v)steering arm vii) tie rod viii) king pin 
When the operator turns the steering wheel, the motion is transmitted through the steering 
shaft to the angular motion of the pitman arm through a set of gears. The angular movement 
of the pitman arm is further transmitted to the steering arm through drag link and tie rods. 
Steering arm are keyed to the respective king pins which are integral part of the stub axle on 
which wheels are mounted. The movement of steering arm affects the movement of front 
wheel 
1. Hydraulic control system 
It is a mechanism in a tractor to raise , hold or lower  the mounted implement or semi-
mounted equipments by hydraulic means. All tractors are equipped with hydraulic control 
system for operating three point hitch of the tractor. Hydraulic system works on PASCAL‟s 
Law which states that pressure applied to an enclosed fluid is transmitted equally in all 
directions. 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
44 
Basic components of hydraulic system 
1. Hydraulic pump 
2. Hydraulic cylinder and piston 
3. Hydraulic tank 
4. Control valve 
5. Safety valve 
6. Hose pipe and fittings 
7. Lifting arms 
The hydraulic pump draws up oil from the oil reservoir and sends it to the control valve under 
high pressure. From the control valve, the oil goes to the hydraulic cylinder to operate the 
piston, which in turn, raises the arms. The implements attached with the arms are lifted up. 
1. Brakes 
Brake is used to stop or slow down the motion of the tractor. It is mounted on the driving axle 
and operated by two independent pedals. Each pedal can be operated independently to assist 
the turning of tractor during field work or locked together by means of a lock. 
Types of brakes – a) Mechanical brake  b) hydraulic brake 
1. Power take off 
It is a part of tractor transmission system. It consists of a shaft, a shield and a cover. The shaft 
is externally splined to transmit tortional power to another machine. A rigid guard fitted on a 
tractor covers the power-take-off shaft as a safety device. The guard is called power take off 
shield. As per ASAE standards PTO speed is 540+ 10 rpm when operating under load. In order 
to operate 1000 rpm PTO drive machine, a new standard has been developed. 
 
 
PTO on a tractor PTO drive 
1. Belt pulley    
All tractors are provided with a belt pulley. The function of the pulley is to transmit power 
from the tractor to stationary machinery by means of a belt. It is used to operate thresher, 
centrifugal pump, silage cutter, and several other machinery. The pulley is located either on 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
45 
the left, right or rear side of the tractor. Pulley drive is engaged or disengaged from the engine 
by means of a clutch.  
 
Belt pulley connected to  tractor PTO 
1. Control board or dash board 
The control board of a tractor generally consists of  
1. Main switch 
2. Throttle 
3. Decompression lever  
4. Hour meter 
5. Light switch`  
6. Horn button 
7. Battery charging indicator 
8. oil pressure indicator 
9. Water temperature gauge 
1. Main switch - When the main switch is on , the electric current floes in the electric circuit 
2. Throttle lever - This lever is for increasing or decreasing the speed of the engine. 
3. Decompression lever - This lever releases the compression pressure from the combustion 
chamber of the engine and helps to start the engine. 
4. Hour meter - This meter indicates the engine hour as well as engine revolution per minute 
5. Light switch - light switch is for light points only 
6. Horn button - This is for horn of the tractor 
7. Battery charger indicator - This indicates the charge and discharge of the battery. 
8. Oil pressure indicator - this indicates the lubricating oil pressure in the system 
9. Water temperature gauge - this indicates the temperature of water of the cooling system 
 
 
Tractor dash board 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
46 
IMPORTANT TERMS CONNECTED WITH TRACTORS 
1. Wheel base: Wheel base is the horizontal distance between the front and rear 
wheels of a tractor 
2. Ground clearance: It is the height of the lowest point of the tractor from the 
ground surface, the tractor being loaded to its permissible weight 
3. Track: Track in the distance between the two wheels of the tractor on the same 
axle., measured at the ground contact 
4. Turning space: It is the diameter of the smallest circle , described by the outer 
most point of the tractor, while moving at a speed not exceeding 3 km/hr with 
thr steering wheels in full lock. 
5. Cage wheels: It is a wheel or an attachment to a wheel with spaced cross bars for 
improving traction of the tractor in a wet field. It is generally used in paddy field 
CRAWLER TRACTOR 
A crawler tractor (also called: track-type tractor, tractor crawler, or track-laying vehicle) is a 
vehicle that runs on continuous tracks instead of wheels. In agriculture they are used for land 
clearing and  land leveling works. The principal advantages of crawler tractor over wheeled 
tractors are that they are in contact with a larger surface area than the wheeled tractor, and as a 
result exert a much lower force per unit area on the ground than a conventional wheeled 
tractor of the same weight. This makes them suitable for use on soft, low friction and uneven 
ground such as mud, ice and snow. The principal disadvantage is that tracks are a more 
complex mechanism than a wheel, and relatively prone to failure modes such as snapped or 
derailed tracks. 
  
Crawler tractor  or chain type tractor has the following characterizes 
1. It is designed to secure good adhesion and transmit high drawbar pull in difficult field 
conditions, where wheel tractors fail to secure adequate grip on the soil 
2. It provides large area of contact with the ground 
3. It is useful at places where adhesion is difficult and rolling resistance is high 
4. It is most suited for heavy work, specially earth moving work and reclamation work 
5. It is used for all types of agricultural works with heavy implements 
 Crawler type tractors mainly consists of  
1. Track frame assembly   2. Track chain 
   3. Steering clutch    4. steering brake 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
47 
POWER TILLER 
It is a prime mover in which the direction of travel and its control for field operation is 
performed by the operator walking behind it. It is also known as Hand tractor or walking type 
tractor. The concept of power tiller came in the world in the year 1920. Japan is the first 
country to use power tiller on large scale. In Japan , the first successful model of power tiller 
was designed in the year 1947.In India power tiller was introduced in the year 1963. 
Manufacturing of several makes of power tillers like Iseki, Sato, Krishi, Kubota, Yanmar and 
Mitsubishi were started in India after 1962 
In agricultural power tillers are used for ploughing, sowing, spraying, harvesting and 
transporting works. It is the most wanted machine for puddling operation in rice cultivation. 
 
 
     Power tiller Power tiller 
Components of power tiller 
1. Engine   2. Transmission gears 
3. Clutch   4. Brakes 
5. Rotary unit 
All power tillers are fitted with an I.C. engine. At present makes like Kubota, Mitsubishi, 
Krishi, Yanmar and Satoh use diesel engine. Iseki make use kerosene engine. 
Operation of a power tiller ( power transmission in a power tiller) 
 For operation of power tiller, the power is obtained from the I>C engine, fitted on the power 
tiller. The engine power goes to the main clutch with the help of belt or chain. From main 
clutch power is divided in two routes, one goes to transmission geras, steering clutch and the 
to wheels. The other component goes to the tilling clutch and then to tilling attachment .V- belt 
pulley is usually used to transmit power from the engine to the main clutch. 
Main clutch: Power goes from engine to main clutch through V- belt – pulley arrangement 
Transmission gears: Transmission gears consists of gears, shafts, and bearings. Transmission 
gears reduce speed of the engine and increase the torque at the wheels.  
Brakes: All power tillers have braking arrangement for stopping the movement of power 
tiller.  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
48 
Wheels: Usually two to four ply pneumatic tyre are used in power tillers for the wheels. The 
inflation pressure ranges from 1.1 to 1.4 kg/cm2.  
Rotary unit:  Power tillers have a rotary unit for field operation. Rotary tines are used in rotary 
unit for soil cutting and pulverizing purposes. Rotary tines are of three types 
a) Straight tines b) Curved tines 
c) L shape blades 
Uses  
1. For puddling operation in paddy fields- using rotary tines 
2. For cutting and pulverizing the soil in dry lands and in garden lands 
3. For cutting and pulverizing the stubbles of sugarcane, maize and cotton 
4. For sowing and inter-cultivation works 
5. For spraying of orchard trees 
6. For transporting purposes 
 
 
 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
49 
 
 
Lecture 05 
TILLAGE- OBJECTIVES AND TYPES FURROW TERMINOLOGY AND 
METHODS OF PLOUGHING. FIELD CAPACITY AND FIELD EFFICIENCY 
TILLAGE 
 
Mechanical manipulation of soil to provide favorable condition for proper crop growth is 
called tillage. Soil tillage consists of breaking the compact surface of earth to a certain depth 
and to loosen the soil mass so as to enable the roots of the crops to penetrate and spread into 
the soil. 
Objectives of Tillage 
 To prepare a desirable soil structure for a deep seed bed or a root bed suitable for 
different types of crops.( A granular structure is desirable to allow rapid infiltration and 
good retention of rainfall, to provide adequate air capacity and exchange with in the 
soil and to minimize resistance to root penetration. A good seed bed generally 
considered to imply finer particles and greater firmness in the vicinity of the seed) 
 To control  weeds or to remove unwanted crop plants (thinning) 
 To manage plant residues. ( Mixing of trash is desirable from the tilth and 
decomposition stand points and retention of trash in the top layers reduce erosion) 
 To minimize soil erosion. (By following counter tillage, listing and proper placement of 
trash). 
 To establish specific surface configurations for planting, irrigating, drainage, harvesting 
operations etc. 
 To incorporate and mix fertilizers, pesticides, soil amendments etc. in to the soil 
Classification of Tillage 
Tillage operations for seed bed preparations are classified as: i) Primary tillage  ii) Secondary 
tillage. 
1. Primary tillage: 
The initial major soil working operation designed to plough the soil deeply to reduce soil 
strength, cover plant materials and rearrange aggregates is called primary tillage. The 
objectives of primary tillage are 
 To reduce soil strength 
 To rearrange aggregates 
  To cover plant materials and burry weeds 
 To kill insects and pests 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
50 
The implements used for primary tillage are called as primary tillage implements. They 
include many animal drawn and tractor drawn implements. Animal drawn implements 
mostly include indigenous ploughs and mould-board ploughs. Tractor drawn implements 
include mould-board ploughs, disc ploughs, heavy duty disk harrows, sub soil ploughs, chisel 
ploughs and other similar implements. 
2. Secondary tillage: 
Lighter and finer tillage operations performed in the soil after primary tillage to create proper 
soil tilt and. surface configuration for seeding and planting are called secondary tillage 
operations.  Secondary tillage operations are generally done on the surface soil. They do not 
cause much soil inversion and shifting of soil from one place to other. They consume less 
power per unit area compared to primary tillage operations. The main objectives of secondary 
tillage are 
 To break the big clods and make the soil surface uniform and leveled as needed for a 
seed bed 
 To destroy grasses and weeds in the field. 
 To cut crop residues and mix them with top soil 
The implements used for secondary tillage operations are called secondary tillage implements. 
They include different types of harrow, cultivators, sweeps, clod crushers, levellers, bund 
formers, ridge ploughs etc. 
TILLAGE SYSTEMS  
Tillage system consists of sequences of operations that manipulate the soil in order to produce 
a crop. The operations include tilling, planting, fertilization, pesticide application, harvesting, 
and residue chopping or shredding. The ways in which these operations are implemented 
affect the physical and chemical properties of the soil, which in turn affect plant growth.  
There are two types of tillage systems namely a) conservation tillage system including no-till, 
ridge till and mulch till systems and  b) other than conservation tillage systems namely a) 
reduced tillage system and b) conventional tillage system. 
Conservation tillage (30 percent or more crop residue left after planting) 
Any tillage and planting system that covers 30 percent or more of the soil surface with crop 
residue, after planting, to reduce soil erosion by water or any system that maintains at least 
1,120 kilogram per hectare of flat, small grain residue equivalent on the surface throughout the 
critical wind erosion period is called conservation tillage system Conversion tillage systems 
are further classified  as a) no-till, b) ridge-till, and c) mulch-till. Systems 
1. No- till: No-till is defined as a system in which the soil is left undisturbed from harvest to 
planting except for nutrient injection. Planting or drilling is accomplished in a narrow seedbed 
or slot created by coulters, row cleaners, disk openers, in-row chisels, or roto-tillers. Weed 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
51 
control is accomplished primarily with herbicides. Cultivation may be used for emergency 
weed control. 
2. Ridge-till: In ridge-till, the soil is also left undisturbed from harvest to planting except for 
nutrient injection. Planting is completed in a seedbed prepared on ridges with sweeps, disk 
openers, coulters, or row cleaners. Residue is left on the surface between ridges. Weed control 
is accomplished with herbicides and/or cultivation. Ridges are rebuilt during cultivation. 
3. Mulch-till: The soil is disturbed before planting. Tillage tools such as chisels, field 
cultivators, disks, sweeps or blades are used. Weed control is accomplished with herbicides 
and/or cultivation. Mulch-till is a category that includes all conservation tillage practices other 
than no-till and ridge-till. Two tillage practices that fall into this category are zone-till and 
strip-till. Both of these tillage practices involve tilling a strip into which seed and fertilizer are 
placed. 
Other tillage systems (less than 30 percent crop residue left after planting) 
Tillage systems that leave less than 30 percent crop residue after planting are not classified as 
conservation tillage. However, these systems may meet erosion control goals with or without 
other supporting conservation practices, such as strip cropping, contouring, terracing, etc. 
1) Reduced-till: Reduced-till systems leave 15-30 percent residue cover after planting or 560 to 
1,120 kilograms per hectare of small grain residue equivalent throughout the critical wind 
erosion period. 
2) Conventional-till: Conventional-till systems leave less than 15 percent residue cover after 
planting, or less than 560 kilograms per hectare of small grain residue equivalent throughout 
the critical wind erosion period. These systems generally involve plowing or some other form 
of intensive tillage. 
ANOTHER CLASSIFICATION OF TILLAGE SYSTEMS 
There are two types of tillage namely a. Conventional tillage or clean tillage and b. 
Conservation tillage 
1. Conventional tillage or clean tillage: Ploughing the entire field several times to prepare a 
seed bed is called conventional tillage 
2. Conservation tillage: Ploughing the field with lesser number of passes over the entire land 
or ploughing only in the required space of the land and then sowing is called conservation 
tillage. . Different types of conservation tillage are as fallows 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
52 
a. Minimum Tillage -Minimum soil manipulation necessary to meet tillage requirements 
 
Minimum Tillage for Wheat 
 
b. Mulch Tillage – Tillage operations in which nearly 30 % of crop residue or other mulching 
materials are left on or near the soil surface is called mulch tillage.  
  
 
Farm Waste Mulching 
 
Mulch tillage 
c. Rotary Tillage for crop production is called minimum tillage. 
 
d. Strip Tillage - In strip tillage system only isolated bands of soil are tilled.- Tillage operations 
employing rotary action of the tool to cut, break and mix the soil is called rotary tillage.. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
53 
 
 
 
Strip tillage in wheat Strip tillage in corn Strip till in wheat 
 
   
e. Combined Tillage – Tillage operations utilizing simultaneously two or more different types 
of tillage tools or implements to simplify, control or reduce the number of operations over a 
field is called combined tillage.  
PLOUGHING OF LAND: 
Ploughing of land separates the top layer of soil into furrow slices. The furrows are turned 
sideways and inverted to a varying degree, depending upon the type of plough being used. It 
is a primary tillage operation, which is performed to shatter soil uniformly with partial or 
complete soil inversion.  
Furrow terminologies 
 
Fig.1. Plough furrow 
There are a few important terms frequently used in connection with ploughing of a land. 
(i) Furrow: It is a trench formed by an implement in the soil during the field operation (Fig.1a). 
(ii) Furrow slice: The mass of soil cut, lifted and thrown to one side is called furrow slice. 
(iii) Furrow wall: It is an undisturbed soil surface by the side of a furrow. 
(iv) Crown: The top portion of the turned furrow slice is called crown. 
(v) Back furrow: A raised ridge left at the centre of the strip of land when ploughing is started 
from centre to side is called back furrow. When the ploughing is started in the middle of a 
field, furrow is collected across the field and while returning trip another furrow slice is 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
54 
lapped over the first furrow. This is the raised ridge which is named as back furrow (Fig.1b). 
(vi) Dead furrow: An open trench left in between two adjacent strips of land after finishing 
ploughing is called dead furrow (Fig.1c). 
(vii) Head land: While ploughing a land with a tractor a strip of unploughed land is left at 
each end of the field for the tractor to turn, which is called head land. At the end of each trip, 
the plough is lifted until the tractor and the plough have turned and are in position to start the 
return trip. The head land is about 6 meters wide for two or three bottom tractor plough and 
one meter more for each additional bottom. 
METHODS OF PLOUGHING A LAND  
There are two main methods of ploughing a field which are known as “inlands” and “round 
about” ploughing 
A normal right hand plough must always have an open furrow on the right in which to lay the 
next furrow slice. It is therefore, necessary to travel across the field in one place and come back 
in another. There are two ways of doing this by “gathering” and “casting‟   
Gathering: 
Whenever a plough works round a strip of ploughed land, it is said to be gathering. The 
tractor and plough turns to right each time the head land is reached. When the land is 
ploughed, a raised ridge (double width ridge) is formed in the center of the field. This 
however would be uneconomical way of working as time is wasted at the start in making 
awkward turns, while later, total idle running would be increased along the head land 
Casting: 
Whenever a plough works round a strip of un ploughed land, it is said to be casting. The 
tractor and plough turns to the left each time the head land is reached. When the land is 
ploughed in this way a wide furrow (double width furrow) will be left in the center and is 
termed as „finish‟ or open furrow or dead furrow 
 
a.. Gathering              b. Casting 
It is recommended that long field should be ploughed by gathering in one season and casting 
in another season. It avoids building up of a ridge in the centre and an open furrow at each 
side or vice versa. However, ploughing of a field either by casting or by gathering alone is 
normally uneconomical. For economical ploughing the following methods are used. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
55 
a) Continuous ploughing method 
In normal conditions, the continuous ploughing method is considered very convenient and 
economical. This is a method usually used in which the tractor and plough never run idle for 
more than three quarter land width along the headland and never turn in a space narrower 
than a quarter land width. In this method, first the headland is marked and the first ridge is set 
up at three quarter of a land width from the side (Fig. a). The other ridges are set at full width 
over the field. The operator starts ploughing between the first ridge and the side land. The 
operator continues to turn left and cast in the three quarter land until ploughing is completed 
in a quarter land width on each side (Fig. b). At this stage, the plough is lifted to half depth for 
the last trip down the side land of the field. This leaves a shallow furrow where the finish 
comes. 
 
 
        Continuous ploughing method 
 
After this stage, the driver turns right and gathers round the one fourth land  already 
ploughed . Gathering is continued till the un ploughed strip in first three-quarter land is 
ploughed and completed. This gathering reduces the first full land by a quarter (Fig. c). The 
remaining three quarter land can be treated in exactly the same manner as the original three 
quarter land completed earlier. This process is repeated for all other lands in the field. 
 
b) Round and round ploughing 
In this method, the plough moves round and round in a field. This system is adopted under 
conditions where ridges and furrows interfere with cultivation work. The field can be started 
in two ways. 
 
a) Starting at the centre  
A small plot of land is marked in the middle of the field and it is ploughed first. After that, the 
plough works round this small plot and the entire plot is completed. This is not a very 
economical method. 
 
b) Starting at the outer end 
Tractor starts ploughing at one end of the field and then moves on all the sides of the field and 
comes gradually from the sides to the centre of the field. Wide diagonals are left unploughed 
to avoid turning with the plough. There are no back furrows in this method. Conventional 
ploughing is usually done by this method. 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
56 
c) One way ploughing 
This system requires the use of a special type of plough known as reversible plough or one 
way plough. Such a plough turns furrows to the left or right. After the head land has been 
marked, the operator plough along a straight side land mark. At the end of the first trip, he 
turns his tractor in a loop and returns down the same furrow. No dead and back furrows are 
left in the field. In gently sloping fields, this method is suitable. 
 
FIELD PERFORMANCE OF MACHINES 
The rate at which a machine can cover a field while performing its intended function is one of 
the considerations in determining the cost of operation of the machine 
Theoretical field capacity 
It is the rate of field coverage that would be obtained if the machine were performing its 
function 100 % of the time at the rated forward speed and always covering 100 % of its rated 
width,  
Theoretical field capacity  FCT  =      ha / h 
Another equation 
Theoretical field capacity   FCT  =     
Where 
FCT    =   effective field capacity, hectare per hr. 
S       =    speed of travel in km per hour. 
W      =   theoretical width of cut of the machine in metre, and 
 
Theoretical time per hectare 
It is the time that would be required at the theoretical field capacity 
 
Effective operating time 
It is the time during which the machine is actually performing its intended function. The 
effective operating time per hectare is greater than the theoretical time per hectare if less than 
full rated width is utilized 
 
Effective field capacity 
It is the actual coverage of the machine based on the total field time. Effective field capacity is 
usually expressed as hectares per hour 
 
Field efficiency 
It is the ratio of effective field capacity to theoretical field capacity expressed as percent. 
Field efficiency =  
Effective field capacity is calculated as follows 
FCA   =     ha/h 
Where  
FCA = effective field capacity, hectare per hr. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
57 
S = speed of travel in km per hour. 
W = theoretical width of cut of the machine in metre, and 
E = field efficiency in per cent. 
Soil inversion =   
 
Soil pulverization 
It is the quality of work performed by a plough expressed in terms of particle size distribution. 
It is determined by sieve analysis. 
 
PROBLEMS ON FIELD CAPACITY AND FIELD EFFICIENCY OF TILLAGE 
IMPLEMENTS 
Theoretical field capacity 
It is the rate of field coverage of the implement, based on 100 per cent of time at the rated 
speed and covering 100 per cent of its rated width. 
Theoretical field capacity in hectares / hr =  
 
Effective field capacity 
It is the actual area covered by the implement based on its total time consumed and its width. 
 
Field efficiency 
It is the ratio of effective field capacity and theoretical field capacity expressed in percent. 
Field efficiency =  
Effective field capacity is calculated as follows 
C =  
Where  
C = effective field capacity, hectare per hr. 
S = speed of travel in km per hour. 
W = theoretical width of cut of the machine in metre, and 
E = field efficiency in per cent. 
Problem.1. A 5 x 20 cm double action disc harrow is operated by a tractor having a speed of 5 
km/h. Calculate the actual field capacity, assuming the field efficiency of  80 percent. 
Solution:  
Size of the harrow (width) = 5 x 20 = 100 cm 
Area of coverage =  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
58 
= (1 x 5 x 80) / 1000 
= 0.4 ha/h 
Problem 2: A 3 x 30 cm plough is moving at a speed of 4 km/h. calculate how much time it 
take to plough 500 x 500 m field when the field efficiency is 70 %. 
Solution: 
Width of the plough = 3 x 30 = 90 cm = 0.9 m 
Effective field capacity = (0.9 x 4 x 70)/ 1000  
= 0.25 ha/h = 2500 m2/h 
            Time required                                     =             500 x 500/ 2500            
= 100 h 
Problem 3: A 4 bottom 40 cm mould board plough is operating at 5.5 km/h speed with 75 % 
field efficiency. Calculate what is the rate of doing work in hectares per hour. 
Solution: 
Width of the plough = 4 x 40 = 160 cm = 1.6 m 
Area covered = 1.6 x 5.5 x 75/1000 
= 0.66 ha/h 
Problem 4: An indigenous plough has a 20 cm wide furrow at the top and 10 cm depth.  
Calculate the volume of soil handled per day 8 hours if the speed of working is 2.5 km/h. 
Solution: 
Furrow cross section = 10 x20/2  
= 100 cm2 
Distance traveled in 8 hours = 8 x 2.5 x 1000 = 20,000 m 
Volume of soil handled = 20000 x 100/ 10000  
=  200 m3 
Model questions 
 A three bottom 40 cm M.B plough is working at a speed of 4 km/h . Calculate the 
effective field capacity if the field efficiency is 80 percent. 
 A four bottom 30 cm M.B plough is working at a speed of 4.5 km/h. Calculate the actual 
field capacity if the  field efficiency is 70 percent. 
MODEL QUESTIONS 
 List the animal drawn primary tillage implements . 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
59 
iii.       Define Theoretical field capacity. 
iv. Define Effective field capacity. 
v. Define field efficiency 
vi. List the objectives of Tillage 
 Differentiate casting and gathering. 
 With neat diagram mention the furrow terminologies 
 What do you mean by soil pulverization? 
 Define conservation tillage 
 Define mulch tillage 
1. Preparation of soil in such a way that crop residues and other mulching materials  are left 
on the surface is called 
a. minimum tillage            b. strip tillage    c. rotary tillage            d. mulch tillage 
2. The open trench left in between two adjacent strips of land after finishing the  ploughing is 
called 
a. dead furrow    b. back furrow   c. head land     d. crown 
3. Theoretical field capacity of a double action disc harrow is 1.0 ha/h. Field efficiency is 80 %. 
What is the actual field capacity? 
a. 1.0 ha/h   b. 1.5 ha/h   c. 0.5 ha/h    d. 0.8 ha/h 
4. Soil tillage consists of breaking compact surface of soil to certain  depth and loosening the 
soil True / False 
5. Whenever a plough works round  a strip of un ploughed land it is called casting True / 
False 
6. When a plough works round a strip of ploughed land it is called as Casting True / False 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
60 
 
Lecture 06 
PRIMARY TILLAGE - OBJECTIVES, MOULD BOARD PLOUGH , DISC 
PLOUGH, CHISEL PLOUGH, SUBSOILER , COMPONENTS AND 
FUNCTIONS, TYPES, ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES 
 
PRIMARY TILLAGE: 
The initial major soil working operation designed to plough the soil deeply to reduce soil 
strength, cover plant materials and rearrange aggregates is called primary tillage.  
Objectives of primary tillage 
 To reduce soil strength 
  To rearrange aggregates 
  To cover plant materials and burry weeds 
 To kill insects and pests 
The implements used for primary tillage are called as primary tillage implements. They 
include many animal drawn and tractor drawn implements. Animal drawn implements 
mostly include indigenous ploughs and mould-board ploughs. Tractor drawn implements 
include mould-board ploughs, disc ploughs, heavy duty disk harrows, subsoil ploughs, chisel 
ploughs and other similar implements. 
PLOUGH 
The main implement used for primary tillage is a plough. Ploughing essentially consists of 
opening the upper crust of the soil, breaking the clods and making the soil suitable for sowing 
seeds. The purpose of ploughing can be summarized as follows 
 To obtain a deep seed bed of good texture. 
 To increase the water holding capacity of the soil. 
 To improve soil aeration. 
 To destroy weeds and grasses. 
 To destroy insects and pests. 
 To prevent soil erosion and 
 To add fertility to the soil by covering vegetation. 
Classification of ploughs according to power used 
 Bullock drawn ploughs- indigenous types 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
61 
ii) Walking type 
 Short beam 
 Long beam 
ii) Riding type 
 Tractor drawn ploughs 
 mounted type 
 Semi mounted type 
INDIGE NOUS PLOUGH 
It is an animal drawn plough. It penetrates into the soil and breaks it open. It forms V shaped 
furrows with 15-20 cm top width and 12-15 cm depth. It can be used for ploughing in dry land, 
garden land and wetlands. The size of the plough is represented by the width of the body and 
the field capacity is around 0.4 ha per day of 8 hours. The functional components include 
share, body, shoe, handle and beam. Except share all other parts are made up of wood. In 
villages local artisans make the plough and supply to the farmers. These ploughs are also 
called as country ploughs. 
 
 
 Indigenous plough 
 
Share - It is the working part of the plough attached to the shoe with which it penetrates into 
the soil and breaks it open. 
Shoe - It supports and stabilizes the plough at the required depth.  
Body - It is the main part of the plough to which the shoe, beam and handle are attached. In 
country ploughs both body and shoe are made in a single piece of wood.. 
Beam - It is a long wooden piece, which connects the main body of the plough to the yoke. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
62 
Handle - A wooden piece vertically attached to the body to enable the operator to control the 
plough while it is working 
In each state farmers use indigenous ploughs of their own make.  
Operational adjustments 
a. Lowering or raising the free end of the beam with respect to the plough body results in an 
increase or decrease in the share angle with respect to the horizontal surface which in turn 
increase or decrease the depth of ploughing. 
b. Changing the length of the beam between plough body and yoke of the animals will also 
alter the depth of ploughing. Reducing the beam length will decrease the depth of cut and vice 
versa.  
MOULD BOARD PLOUGH 
Moldboard plough is one of the oldest of all agricultural implements and is generally 
considered to be the important tillage implement. Ploughing accounts for more traction energy 
than any other field operation. Mouldboard ploughs are available for animals, power tiller and 
tractor operation. While working, a mouldboard plough does four jobs namely a) cutting the 
furrow slice b) lifting the furrow slice c) inverting the furrow slice and d) pulverizing the 
furrow slice. 
 
 
Two bottom mouldboard plough 
 
Tractor with two bottom mouldboard plough 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
63 
 
Land ploughed by a mouldboard plough 
COMPONENTS OF A MOUL DBOARD PLOUGH 
A animal drawn mouldboard plough consists of a) plough bottom  b) beam and c) hitch 
bracket or clevis. A tractor drawn mouldboard plough consists of a) plough bottom  b) beam 
or standard c) main frame and d) hitch frame 
a)Plough bottom – The part of the plough which actually cuts, lifts, pulverizes and through 
the soil out of the furrow. It is composed of those parts necessary for the rigid structure 
required to cut, lift, turn, and invert the soil. Parts of the mouldboard plough bottom are a) 
Share b) Mould board c) Land side d) Frog and e) Tail piece.  Share, landside, mouldboard are 
bolted to the frog which is an irregular piece of cast iron.  
 
 
 Components of Mould Board plough 
b) Share: It is that part of the plough bottom which penetrates into the soil and makes a 
horizontal cut below the surface. 
c) Mould board: It is the curved part which lifts, turns, and pulverizes the soil slice. 
d) Land side: It is the flat plate which presses against the furrow wall and prevents the plough 
from lateral swinging. The rear part of land side is called heel which slides on the bottom of 
the furrow. 
 e) Frog: It is the part to which s hare, land side and mouldboard are attached. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
64 
f) Tail piece: It is an adjustable extension, which can be fastened to the rear of the  mould 
board to help in turning the furrow slice. 
DETAILS ABOUT DIFFERENT COMPONENTS OF MOULDBOARD PLOUGH  
1.  Share - It penetrates into the soil and makes a horizontal cut below the soil surface . It is a 
sharp, well polished and pointed component. Different portions of the share are called by 
different names such as 
1)Share point  2) Cutting edge  3) Wing of share  4) Gunnel  5) Cleavage edge 
 6) Wing bearing. 
 Share 
 Share point : It is the forward end of the cutting edge 
which actually penetrates into the soil 
 Cutting edge: It is the front edge of the share which 
makes horizontal cut in the soil. It is beveled to some 
distance. 
 Wing of share: It is the outer end of the cutting edge 
of the share. It supports the plough bottom 
 Gunnel: It is the vertical face of the share which slides along the furrow wall. It takes 
the side thrust of the soil and supports the plough bottom against the furrow wall . 
 Cleavage edge: It is the edge of the share which forms joint between moulboard and 
share on the frog. 
 Wing bearing: It is the level portion of the wing of the share, providing a bearing for 
the outer corner of the plough bottom. 
Material of share: The shares are made of chilled cast iron or steel. The steel mainly contains 
about 0.70 to 0.80% carbon and about 0.50 to 0.80% manganese besides other minor elements. 
2. Types of Shares 
Share is of different types such as i) Slip share ii) Slip nose share iii) Shin share and iv) Bar 
point share. 
 
          Types of shares 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
65 
i) Slip share: It is one piece share with curved cutting edge, having no additional part. 
It is a common type of share, mostly used by the farmers. It is simple in design, but it has got 
the disadvantage that the entire share has to be replaced if it is worn out due to constant use. 
ii) Slip nose share: It is a share in which the point of share is provided by a small detachable 
piece. It has the advantage that the share point can be replaced as and when required. If the 
point is worn out, it can be changed with a new nose without replacing the entire share, 
effecting considerable economy. 
iii) Shin share:  It is the share having a shin as an additional part. 
It is similar to the slip share with the difference that an extension is provided to it by the side 
of the mouldboard. 
iv)Bar point share: It is the share in which the point of the share is provided by an adjustable 
and replaceable iron bar. This bar serves the purpose of share point and land side of the 
plough. 
3. Mouldboard: It is  that part of the plough which receives the furrow slice from the share. If 
lifts, turns and breaks the furrow slice. To suit different soil conditions and crop requirements, 
mouldboard has been designed in different shapes. The mouldboard is of following types: a) 
General purpose b) Stubble type c) Sod or Breaker type and d) Slat type. 
 
 
 Types of mould board 
a) General purpose:  It is a mouldboard having medium curvature lying between stubble and 
sod types. The mouldboard is fairly long with a gradual twist, the surface being slightly 
convex. The sloping of the surface is gradual. It turns a well defined furrow slice and 
pulverizes the soil thoroughly. 
b) Stubble type: It is short but broader mouldboard with a relatively abrupt curvature which 
lifts, breaks and   turns the furrow slice. .This is best suited to work in stubble soil that is under 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
66 
cultivation for years together. Stubble soil is that soil in which stubble of the plants from the 
previous crop is still left on the land at the time of ploughing. This type of mouldboard is not 
suitable for lands with full of grasses. 
c) Sod or Breaker type: It is a long mould board with gentle curvature which lifts and inverts 
the unbroken furrow slice.. It turns over thickly covered soil. This is very useful where 
complete inversion of soil is required by the farmer. This type has been designed for used in 
sod soils (soil with much of grass). 
d) Slat type: It is a mouldboard whose surface is made of slats placed along the length of the 
mouldboard, so that there are gaps between the slats. This type of mouldboard is often used, 
where the soil is sticky, because the solid mouldboard does not scour well in sticky soils. 
4) Land side: It is the flat plate which presses against and transmits lateral thrust of the plough 
bottom to the furrow wall (Fig.6 ). It helps to resist the side pressure exerted by the furrow 
slice on the mouldboard. It also helps in stabilizing the plough while in operations. Land side 
is fastened to the frog with the help of plough bolts. The rear bottom end of the land side is 
known as heel which rubs against the furrow sole. 
 
 
 Mould board bottom 
 
5) Frog: Frog is that part of the plough bottom to which the other components of the plough 
bottom are attached. It is an irregular piece of metal. It is made of cast iron for cast iron 
ploughs or it may be welded steel for steel ploughs. 
6) Tail piece: It is an important extension of mouldboard which helps in turning a furrow slice. 
 
PLOUGH ACCESSORIES 
There are a few accessories necessary for efficient function of the plough. They are  (i) Jointer 
(ii) Coulter (iii) Gauge wheel (iv) Land wheel and (v) Furrow wheel. 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
67 
a) Jointer 
It is a small irregular piece of metal having a shape similar to an ordinary plough bottom. It 
looks like a miniature plough. Its purpose is to turn over a small ribbon like furrow slice 
directly in front of the main plough bottom. This small furrow slice is cut from the left and 
upper side of the main furrow slice and is inverted so that all trashes on the top of the soil are 
completely turned down and buried under the right hand corner of the furrow. 
b) Coulter 
It is a device used to cut the furrow slice vertically from the land ahead of the plough bottom. 
It cuts the furrow slice from the land and leaves a clear wall. It also cuts trashes which are 
covered under the soil by the plough. The coulter may be (a) Rolling type disc coulter or (b) 
Sliding type knife coulter. 
Rolling type disc coulter 
It is a round steel disk which has been sharpened on the edge and suspended on a shank and 
yoke from the beam. The edge of the coulter may be either smooth or notched. It is so fitted 
that it can be adjusted up-down and side ways. The up-down adjustment takes care of depth 
and sideways adjustment is meant for taking care of width of cut. 
Sliding type knife coulter 
It is a stationary knife fixed downward in a vertical position on the beam. The knife does not 
roll over the ground but slides on the ground. The knife may be of different shapes and sizes. 
c) Gauge wheel 
It is an auxiliary wheel of an implement to maintain an uniform depth of working.  
Gauge wheel helps to maintain uniformity in respect of depth of ploughing in different soil 
conditions. It is usually placed in hanging position. 
d) Land wheel - It is the wheel of the plough which runs on the ploughed land. 
e) Front furrow wheel - It is the front wheel of the plough which runs in the furrow. 
f) Rear furrow wheel - It is the rear wheel of the plough which runs in the furrow. 
ADJUSTMENT OF MOULDBOARD PLOUGH 
For proper penetration and efficient work by the mouldboard plough, some adjustments are 
made from time to trime. They are (i) Vertical suction and (ii) Horizontal suction. 
a) Vertical suction (Vertical clearance) 
It is the maximum clearance under the land side and the horizontal surface when the plough is 
resting on a horizontal surface in the working position. It is also defined as the vertical 
distance from the ground, measured at the joining point of share and land side. (Fig.7a). It 
helps the plough to penetrate into the soil to a proper depth. This clearance varies according to 
the size of the plough. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
68 
 
 
      Vertical clearance horizontal clearances  
b) Horizontal suction (Horizontal clearance) 
It is the maximum clearance between the land side and the furrow wall. This suction helps the 
plough to cut the proper width of furrow slice. This clearance also varies according to the size 
of the plough. It is also known as side clearance. 
c) Throat clearance 
It is the perpendicular distance between share point and lower position of the beam of the 
plough. 
 
 
Throat clearance of plough 
TYPES OF MOULDBOARD PLOUGHS 
 Fixed type (one way) mouldboard plough 
One way plough throws the furrow slice to one side of the direction of travel and is commonly 
used everywhere. It may be long beam type or short beam type  
2) Two-way or Reversible plough 
It is a mouldboard plough which turns furrow slice to the right or left side of direction of 
travel as required. Such ploughs have two sets of opposed bottoms. In such  a plough, all 
furrows can be turned towards the same side of the field by using one bottom for one direction 
of travel and the other bottom on the return trip. Two sets of bottom are so mounted that they 
can be raised or lowered independently or rotated along an axis. Two way ploughs have the 
advantage that they neither upset the slope of the land nor leave dead furrows or back furrows 
in the middle of the field. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
69 
3) Turn wrest plough 
There are some reversible ploughs which have single bottom with an arrangement that the 
plough bottom is changed from right hand to left hand or vice versa by rotating the bottom 
through approximately 180° about a longitudinal axis. This type of plough is called turn wrest 
plough. While moving in one direction, the plough throws the soil in one direction and at the 
return trip the direction of the plough bottom is changed, thus the plough starts throwing the 
soil in the same direction as before. 
 
 
  Turn wrest plough 
OTHER TERMS CONNECTED WITH PLOUGHS 
a) Vertical clevis 
It is a vertical plate with a number of holes and fitted at the end of the beam. By using the 
clevis depth of operation and line of pull are adjusted. 
 
 
 Clevis and line of pull 
******☺****** 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
70 
 
Lecture 07 
SECONDARY TILLAGE EQUIPMENT – HARROWS, LAND FORMING 
EQUIPMENT – ROTAVATORS – WET LAND EQUIPMENT – PUDDLERS 
AND MANURE TRAMPLERS – CAGE WHEELS 
 
SECONDARY TILLAGE 
Tillage operations performed after primary tillage to create proper soil tilth for seeding and 
planting are called secondary tillage. These operations are lighter and finer operations 
performed on the soil after primary tillage operations. Secondary tillage operations do not 
cause much soil inversion and shifting of soil from one place to another place. These 
operations consume less power per unit area compared to primary tillage operations. The 
implements used for secondary tillage operations are called secondary tillage implements they 
include different types of harrows, rollers and pulverizers, rotary tillers, tools for mulching 
and fallowing, cage wheels etc. 
The objectives of secondary tillage 
1. To improve the seed bed by greater pulverization of  the soil 
2. To destroy grasses and weed seeds in the field. 
3. To cut crop residues and mix them with top soil 
4.  To break the big clods and to make the field surface uniform and leveled. 
HARROWS 
Harrow is a secondary tillage implement used for a variety of jobs in crop cultivation. They are 
listed as follows 
1. Used before ploughing to cut vegetable matter such as corn stock, cotton stalk, and 
weeds and mix with soil for  soil conservation 
2. Used to pulverize the top soil so that the furrow slices will make better connection with 
the bottom of the sole preventing air space when slices are turned 
3. Used after ploughing to pulverize the soil and put it in better tilth for the reception of 
the seed 
4. Used for the cultivation of crops 
5. Used for summer fallowing 
6. Used to cover the seeds after sowing 
There are many  kinds of harrows namely, the disc harrow, spike tooth harrow, spring tooth 
harrow, rotary cross- harrow, soil surgeon, triangular harrow, acme harrow, blade harrow , 
reciprocating power harrow etc. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
71 
DISC HARROW 
 It is a harrow, which performs the harrowing operation by means of a set of rotating discs, 
each set being mounted on a common shaft. Disc harro w is found very suitable for hard 
ground with full of stalks and grasses. It cuts the lumps of soil, clods and roots. Discs are 
mounted on one, two or more axles which may be set at a variable angle to the line of motion. 
As the harro w is pulled ahead, the discs rotate on the ground. Depending upon the disc 
arrangements, disc harrows are divided into two classes a) Single action and b) Double action. 
1. SINGLE ACTION DISC HARROW 
It is a harrow with two gangs placed end to end with an angle greater than 90o. The discs are 
arranged in opposite directions on both gangs so that the right side gang throws the soil 
towards right and the left side gang throws the soil towards left. 
 
Types of disc harrow 
2. DOUBLE ACTION DISC HARROW (TANDEM DISC HARROW) 
The double action disc harrow is often called a tandem harrow because a set of two gangs 
follows behind the front gangs and is arranged in such a way that the discs on the front gangs 
throw the soil in one direction ( usually outward) , and the discs on the rear gangs throw the 
soil in the opposite direction (outward) Thus the entire field is worked twice in each trip  
 
 
3. OFF-SET DISC HARROW-  
Offset disk harrow has one right-hand gang (thro wing the soil to the right) and one left – hand 
gang (throwing the soil to the left), operating in tandem. The harrow is given this name 
because the harrow can be operated in offset position in relation to the tractor. A change in 
hitch can cause the harro w to run either to the left or right of the tractor. It is possible to 
operate the harrow under limbs, near trees in an orchard. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
72 
 
 
    Offset disc harrow Fig.4. Disc harrow 
PARTS OF A DISC HARROW 
i. Disc: It is a circular concave disc which cuts and inverts the soil.  Disc is made of heat-
treated hardened steel. Tractor drawn disc harrows have concave discs of size varying from 
35-70 cm diameter. Concavity of the disc affects penetration and pulverization of soil. Usually 
two types of disc are used in disc harrows, plain disc and cut away disc. Plain discs have plain 
edges and they are used for all normal works.  Most of the harrows are fitted with plain discs 
only.  Cut away discs have serrated edges and they cut stalks, grass and other vegetation.  
They are not effective for pulverization of soil but it is very useful for puddling the field 
especially for paddy cultivation. 
ii. Gang: Each set of discs that are mounted on a common shaft is called the gang. 
iii. Gang bolt or arbor bolt: It is a long heavy square headed bolt. Discs are mounted on the 
gang bolt. The spacing between the discs on the gang bolt ranges from 15 to 25 cm for light 
duty and 25 to 30 cm for heavy duty harrows.   
iv. Gang angle- The angle between the axis of the gang bolt and the direction of travel is called 
the gang angle. 
v. Gang control lever: This lever is used to change the gang angle of the gangs which in turn 
alters the width of operation. 
vi. Spool or spacer: The flanged tube, mounted on the gang bolt between every two discs to 
prevent the lateral movement of the disc on the shaft is called the `spool‟ or `spacer‟.  Spacer 
 keeps the discs at equal spacing on the gang bolt.  It is usually cast in special shapes and sizes 
and is generally made of cast iron. 
vii. Bearing: Bearing is essential for frictionless rotation of the gang. They also counter act the 
end thrust  due to soil reaction on the discs.  Chilled cast iron bearings are used which are 
more durable than other types of bearings 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
73 
viii. Transport wheel: In trailing type disc harrows, transport wheels are provided for 
transport of the harrow on roads without damage to the edges of the discs .  Mounted type 
harrows do not require wheels for transport work. 
ix. Scraper: It removes the soil that may stick to the concave side of the disc while working and 
thus prevents clogging of the discs. 
x. Weight box: A box like frame is provided on the main frame of the harrow for putting 
additional weight on the implement to increase the penetration of the disc in the soil. 
 
ADJUSTMENTS FOR OBTAINING HIGHER PENETRATION 
There are several factors which affect the penetration of disc harrow in the field. Penetration 
can be increased by 
1. increasing the gang  angle 
2. adding weights 
3.  lowering the hitch point 
4. using sharp edged discs of small diameter and lesser concavity 
5. regulating the speed.( penetration is better in low speeds than in high speeds) 
 
SPIKE TOOTH HARROW 
        Spike tooth harrow has teeth resembling long spikes that stir the soil. These harrows are 
also known as peg tooth harrow, drag harrow, section harrow, or smoothing harrow. Its 
principal use is to smoothen and level the soil directly after ploughing. It will stir the soil to a 
depth of about 5 cm, if weighted. It may be used to cultivate corn, cotton and other row crops 
in early stages of growth. The sections range in width from 1.2 to 1.7m and may have twenty 
five, thirty, thirty five teeth. Several sections may be attached to a hitch bar and a wide swath 
harrowed. The sections may be rigid or flexible. Sections that have guard rails across the ends 
of the bars are called close-end harrows, while those that do not have guard rails are called 
open-end harrows 
 
 ANIMAL DRAWN SPIKE TOOTH HARROW  
The animal drawn spike tooth harrow is usually of rigid type.  These may or may not have 
provisions for changing the angle of spikes in operating conditions.  This harrow mainly 
consists of teeth, tooth bar, guard rail, clamps, braces, levers and draft hooks.  The teeth are 
made up of hardened steel with square/triangular/circular in section.  The teeth are so placed 
on tooth bar that no tooth is directly behind the other.  Teeth are fastened rigidly to the tooth 
bar.  Clamps are rigidly fixed so as not to be loose while in operation. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
74 
 
Spike tooth harrow  - animal drawn 
SPRING TOOTH HARROW 
Spring tooth harro ws are made in sections somewhat like spike tooth harrows. The sections 
vary in width from 0.9 to 1.7m. The sections may have from seven to twelve teeth. A single 
section may be used alone or several sections may be hitched together and used as a unit. The 
number of sections used depends upon the power available.  
The teeth consists of wide, flat, curved, oil-tempered bars of spring steel, one end of which is 
fastened rigidly to a bar; the other end is pointed to give good penetration. The depth to which 
the teeth will penetrate the soil is controlled by adjusting the angle of the teeth by means of 
levers. Some spring tooth harrows are provided with a power – angling hitch. 
 
Spring tooth harro ws are adapted for use in rough and stony ground. They are also used 
extensively to loosen previously ploughed soil ahead of grain drill seeding rice or small grains. 
The teeth will penetrate deeper than those on spike tooth harrow, and they will give when 
obstructions are struck. Spring tooth harrow is also called as quack grass, and Bermuda grass 
eradicator, since the teeth penetrate deeply, tear out and bring the roots to the surface. Spring 
tooth harrows are available for animal and tractor operation 
 
 
Tractor drawn spring tooth harrow Animal drawn spring tooth harrow 
Spring tooth harrow- animal drawn 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
75 
ACME HARROW  
    It is a special type of animal drawn harrow having a transverse horizontal frame with stiff 
curved blades. Also known as blade harrow; curved knife-tooth harrow; pulverizer. The front 
part of the knife breaks the soil and crushes the clods . This harrow obtains a good 
pulverization. It is good for creating soil mulch. 
 
Acme harrow 
PATELA 
It is a wooden plank used for smoothening the soil and crushing the weeds.  It is also used for 
breaking clods, packing and leveling the ploughed soil and to remove the weeds. It is made of 
a wooden plank with a number of curved steel hooks bolted to a steel angle section, which is 
fixed to the rear side of the plank. The cutting edge levels and packs the soil and the curved 
hooks uproot and collect the weeds. It is a animal drawn version 
     
  Patela 
TRIANGULAR HARROW  
It is a spike tooth harrow with triangular frame. The frame is made of wood and pointed 
spikes are fitted in the frame. The teeth of the spikes are fixed and not adjustable. It is used for 
breaking the clods and smoothening the soil surface. 
 
 
Triangular harrow 
 
BLADE HARROW (BAKHAR OR GUNTAKA) 
It is an animal drawn implement used to prepare seedbeds in clayey soils and soil mulch for 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
76 
soil moisture conservation.  It consists of one or more blades attached to a beam which works 
at shallow depth  with minimum or nil soil inversion. 
 
 
 
 Animal drawn blade harrow 
   Tractor drawn 
leveler cum blade 
harrow 
POWER HARROW – TRACTOR DRAWN 
A power harrow tills the soil maintaining the same profile of the field. It pulverizes the upper 
and lower layer of soil without   turning them upside down and thus it forms a good seed bed 
as well as good soil mulch. It consists of two horizontal cross bars fitted with rigid pegs which 
reciprocate taking power from the PTO of a tractor. The pegs are spaced 200 mm wide and are 
staggered with respect to each cross bar. The two bars move in opposite directions and hence 
the implement is dynamically balanced. The oscillating pegs  break the clods and pulverizes 
the soil to a fine tilth. The width of the operation is 2000 mm. and the field capacity is around 
1.5 ha/day. 
 
 
 
Power harrow – tractor   drawn 
    Power harrow – Power 
tiller  drawn 
ROTARY TILLER  
The rotary tiller or rotary cultivator is widely considered as the most important implement as 
it provides fine degree of soil pulverization. It is directly mounted to the tractor and operated. 
The rotor is The benefits of the rotary tiller are a) effective pulverization of soil ensures good 
plant growth b) cutting and mixing of stubbles and roots  and mixing with  soil  and c) leveling 
of the field 
The functional components include, rotor fitted with L shaped steel blades (36 – 48 Nos.), gear 
box, power shaft, sprocket - chain drive,  universal joint, leveling board, shield, depth control 
arrangement, and three point hitching provision. The power from the tractor engine is 
transmitted to the rotary tiller (rotavator) through  PTO (Power Take Off) of the tractor. A 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
77 
leveling board is attached to the rear side of the unit for leveling the tilled soil. Two numbers 
of adjustable brackets are provided one each on either side of the unit for controlling the depth 
of operation.  The rotor is operated at 180- 200 rpm 
Types of blades used in rotary tillers.  
i. 'L' type blade - Works well in trashy conditions. More effective in cutting weeds and but do 
not pulverize the soil much. 
ii. Twisted blade - Suitable for deep tillage in relatively clean grounds, but  clogging and 
wrapping of trashes on the tynes and shafts needs frequent  cleaning. 
iii. Straight blade - Employed on mulchers designed mainly for secondary   tillage. 
 
                
 
          Rotary tiller 
 
LAND ROLLERS OR PULVERISERS  
Land rollers or pulverisers are tools used for further preparation of seed bed. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
78 
1. CLOD CRUSHER: It is used to finish preparing the seed bed by thoroughly pulverizing and 
firming the loose soil so that there will not be any large air space or pockets. It presses the 
upper soil down against the sub soil, making a continuous seedbed in which moisture is 
conserved and given to the roots of the plants as it is needed.  
 
Single gang land roller (Clod crusher)  
2. V- SHAPED ROLLER PULVERIZER: It is constructed of a number of wheel sections 
arranged  on a shaft. The surface of the roller forms a kind of corrugation. so it is also called as 
corrugated roller. It rolls, pulverizes, packs, levels, cultivates, and mulches the soil. 
LEVELERS 
Land leveling is a permanent improvement done on agricultural lands. It is carried out to 
smoothen the contours of land to achieve certain desirable objectives for efficient agricultural 
production. Land leveling helps for (i) efficient application of irrigation water, (ii) improved 
surface drainage, (iii) minimizing soil erosion (iv) conservation of rain water in dry lands and  
The animal drawn leveler consists of a wooden leveling board with a handle . In the front 
portion of the board two hooks are provided for connecting it to the yoke of the animals. 
1.  SOIL SCOOP 
Soil scoops are used for excavating ditches , clearing drains and doing cut and fill jobs  in land 
leveling . It consists of a trough, a blade ,  hitching loop and handle. Soil scoops are available 
Both animal drawn and tractors drawn versions are available   
i. Blade:   Blade is made of light carbon steel with carbon content varying from 0.5 – 0.6%.  The 
angle of the cutting blade varies from 12° to 15° angle The blade is riveted or bolted to the soil 
trough.   
ii. Soil trough: It is made of mild steel sheet and shaped in to a trough.   
iii. Hitching loop: The loop is made of mild steel. The ends of the loop are fitted to the side of 
the soil trough.. The hitching loop is provided with iron rings or pins for connecting the soil 
scoop to animals or a tractor 
iv. Handle: In animal drawn version there are two handles made of timber or mild steel plate 
fitted to the loop and used to control the movement of the implement. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
79 
 
 
Soil scoop – animal 
drawn 
Soil scoop – tractor 
drawn 
2.  TRACTOR DRAWN LEVELER 
It is a tractor-mounted implement controlled by tractor hydraulics and three-point linkage. It 
consists of hitch system, replaceable cutting blade with sharp edge, and a curved plate with 
side wings, which form a bucket.. During operation, the blade digs into the soil and extra soil 
is collected in the bucket, which is released in the depressions of the field. The angle and pitch 
of leveler is adjustable. The leveler can also be angled left or right, or reversed for back filling. 
 
Tractor drawn leveler 
2. LEVELING BOARD- BULLOCK DRAWN  
It is a wooden board of length 2.0m, width 0.4m and thickness 0.3m provided with side 
wings, hitching braces and handle. The board is hitched to animals and pulled. The blade 
scrapes soil from elevated places, the soil is moved to places where there are depressions 
and released. It can be used in leveling of paddy field after puddling. 
SECONDARY TILLAGE IMPLEMENTS FOR RICE CULTIVATION 
1. CAGE WHEELS  
This is an iron wheel, lugged with L angles. The tractor will not work satisfactorily in 
ploughing / puddling of rice fields due to slippage of rubber wheels. To overcome this 
difficulty iron wheels are introduced which are called cage wheels.. Cage wheels are of two 
types viz., half cage wheel and full cage wheel.  The iron lugs provide required grip and 
facilitate easy movement of tractor in rice field. Half cage wheels are fitted to the   rubber 
tyre wheels and used. . For  full cage wheels, tyre wheels are removed and used  The width 
of full cage wheel is 1 m and that of the half cage wheel is 0.5 m.   
2. PUDDLER 
Puddler is used for churning the soil with standing water while preparing fields for paddy 
transplanting.  It is used after completing an initial ploughing with iron plough  or country 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
80 
plough.  It breaks up the clods and churns the soil. The main purpose of puddling is to 
reduce percolation and leaching  losses of water, to kill weeds by decomposition and to 
facilitate transplantation of paddy seedlings by making the soil softer.  Puddling is done in 
standing water of 5-10 cm depth. Different types of puddlers namely straight blade , helical 
blade, paddle type, and cage wheel type puddlers are available  
 Animal drawn puddler consists of four to six number of 0.6m long blades, radial arms to 
hold the blades, axle, bush bearing, frame, hitching braces, handle etc. While pulling, the 
blades rotate and puddle the soil. . The weight of the puddler is 30-40 kg.   
i. Frame: The frame consists of front, rear and side pieces made of steel or wood. 
ii. Puddling unit: Puddling unit consists of blades made of mild steel. The blades are rigidly 
fixed radial arms 
iii..Radial arms: This holds the blades in position.  This is made up of mild steel plate. 
iv. Axle: The axle is made up of mild steel bar of 25 mm in diameter. 
v. Beam: The beam is made up of wood and is suitably placed in the frame with the  help of 
bracer and the other end to the yoke to hitch the animal. 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
81 
 
 
Lecture 08 
SOWING METHODS - SEED DRILLS, SEED CUM FERTILIZER DRILLS - 
COMPONENTS AND FUNCTIONS 
 
Sowing is an art of placing seeds in the soil to have good germination in the field. A perfect 
sowing gives 
1. Correct amount of seed per unit area. 
2. Correct depth of sowing 
3. Correct spacing between row-to-row and plant to plant. 
4. Correct seed rate 
SOWING METHODS 
(i) Broadcasting (ii) Dibbling (iii) Drilling (iv) Seed dropping behind the plough (v) 
Transplanting (vi) Hill dropping (vii) Check row planting. 
(i) Broadcasting 
Broadcasting is the method of random scattering of seeds on the surface of seedbed. It can be 
done manually or mechanically. When broadcasting is done manually, uniformity of seed 
placement depends upon the skill of the man scattering the seeds. Soon after broadcasting the 
seeds are covered by planking or some other devices. Usually higher seed rate is obtained in 
this system. Mechanical broadcasters are used for large-scale sowing. The device scatters the 
seeds on the surface of the seedbed at controlled rates.(ii) Dibbling 
Dibbling is the process of placing seeds in holes made in the seedbed and closing the seed with 
soil. In this method, seeds are placed in holes made at definite depth at fixed spacing. The 
equipment used for dibbling is called dibbler. It is a conical shape instrument used to make 
proper holes in the field. Small hand dibblers are made with several conical projections made 
in a frame (Fig.1). This is very time consuming process, so it is not suitable for small seeds. 
Mostly vegetables are sown in this way. 
 
Dibbler 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
82 
(iii)  Seed dropping behind the plough 
            It is a very common method of sowing followed by farmers in villages. This method is 
used for seeds like maize, gram, peas, wheat and barley. A woman/ man walk 
behind a plough ploughing the land and drop the seeds in the furrows made by the plough. 
Sowing behind the plough can be done by a device known as malobansa . It consists of a 
bamboo tube provided with a funnel shaped mouth. It is fitted to the handle of the plough. 
One man drops the seeds through the funnel and other man handles the plough and the 
bullocks. This method  is a slow and laborious method. 
(iv) Drilling 
Drilling consists of dropping the seeds in furrow lines in a continuous stream and covering 
them with soil. The spacing between the seeds is not uniform. Seed metering may be done 
either manually or mechanically. The number of rows planted may be one or more (Figs.2-5). 
This method is very helpful in achieving proper depth of sowing, proper spacing between 
seeds and proper seed rate. Drilling can be done by using seed drills of tractor drawn and 
animal drawn types 
(v) Transplanting 
Transplanting consists of rising the seedlings in a nursery bed and then planting the seedlings 
in another field (main field). It is commonly done for paddy, vegetable and flowers. It is a time 
consuming operation. Equipment used for planting the seedlings in the main field is 
called transplanter. 
(vi) Hill dropping 
In this method, few seeds are dropped as a hill at a fixed place and not in a continuous stream. 
The spacing between hill to hill in a row is constant The equipments are called planters 
 (vii) Check row planting 
It is a method of planting, in which row-to-row and plant-to-plant distance is uniform. In this 
method, seeds are planted precisely along straight parallel furrows. The rows are always in 
two perpendicular directions. A machine used for check row planting is called check row 
planter. 
 
SEED DRILL 
Seed drill is a machine used for placing the seeds in a continuous stream in furrows at uniform 
rate and at controlled depth with an arrangement of covering the seeds with soil.  
According to the power source used , seed drills may be classified in to  (i) Bullock drawn seed 
drills (ii) Tractor drawn seed drills.. According to the type of seed metering done  animal 
drawn seed drills may be classified into i) manually metered seed drills and ii) mechanically 
metered seed drill.  . In manually metered seed drills a person drops the seeds in the furrows, 
in mechanically metered seed drills a mechanical device called seed metering mechanism is 
used to meter the seeds. There are many designs of  bullock drawn seed drills and tractor 
drawn seed drills which are used for sowing.. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
83 
 
Seed Drill for Wheat 
  
  
 
 
Gorru 
 Bullock drawn 
seed drill 
  Tractor drawn seed 
drills  
Tractor drawn seed 
drills 
Functions of a seed drill: 
 Seed drill performs the following functions 
1. To carry the seeds. 
2. To open  furrows at uniform depths 
3. To meter the seeds 
4. Todeposite the seeds in furrows in an acceptable pattern 
5. To cover the seeds and compact the soil around the seed. 
SEED CUM FERTILIZER DRILL 
Seed drills fitted with fertilizer dropping attachments are called seed-cum-fertilizer drills, 
They deliver both  the seeds and  fertilizers simultaneously  in an acceptable pattern. Seed cum 
fertilizer drill has a large seed box which is divided lengthwise into two compartments, one for 
seed and another for fertilizers distribution. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
84 
Functions of a seed cum fertilizer drill : 
 Seed  cum fertilizer drill performs the following functions 
1. To carry the seeds and fertilizer in separate compartments. 
2. To open  furrows at uniform depths 
3. To meter the seeds and fertilizers 
4. To deposit the seed and fertilizer  in the furrows in an acceptable pattern 
5. To cover the seed and fertilizer and compact the soil around the seed. 
                      
Seed-cum-fertilizer drill 
COMPONENTS OF A SEED DRILL 
A seed drill with mechanical seed metering device mainly consists of:  
(i) Frame (ii) Seed box (iii) Seed metering mechanism (iv)drive transmission system v) Furrow 
openers (vi) Covering device (vii) clutch viii) hitch frame and ix) Transport wheels. 
 Frame 
The frame is usually made of mild steel angle section and flats . It is strong enough to 
withstand all types of loads in working condition. All other parts of a seed drill are fitted to the 
frame. 
Seed box 
It is a box like structure made up of either mild steel or galvanized iron and provided with a 
lid. In some designs  a small agitator is provided at the bottom of the box which agitates the 
seeds while the drill in operation and  prevents clogging of seeds. Seed metering mechanism is 
placed at the bottom of the box. 
Seed metering mechanism 
The mechanism which picks up seeds from the seed box and delivers them in to the seed tube 
is called  seed metering mechanism. Seed metering mechanism may be of several types: (a) Fluted 
feed type (b) Internal double run type (c) Cup feed type (d) Cell feed type (e) Brush feed type 
(f) Auger feed type (g) Picker wheel type and (h) Star wheel type. Usually seed metering 
mechanism is provided at the bottom of the box. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
85 
Drive transmission system 
The drive transmission mechanism consists of a wheel, sprocket-chain assembly and a driven 
shaft that carry the seed picking discs. When the seed drill moves in the field, the drive wheel 
rotates due to its contact with soil and the sprocket wheel also rotes. The chain connecting the 
drive wheel sprocket and driven wheel sprocket rotates the shaft carrying the seed metering 
discs. 
Furrow openers 
These are the parts which open up furrows in the soil for placing the seeds. Different types of 
furrow openers in use namely 1. Hoe type 2. Shoe type 3. Stub runner type 4. Full or curved 
runner type 5. Single disc type  5. Double disc type etc. In cultivator type seed drills the tines 
work as furrow openers. 
Covering device or furrow closer 
It is a device which closes the furrow with soil after the seed has been dropped in it. Covering 
the seeds is usually done by chains, bars, packers, rollers or press wheels, designed in various 
shapes and .sizes  
Transport wheel 
There are two wheels fitted on an axle for transporting the drill on roads. Iron wheels are used 
as transport wheels . Some manufacturers use  pneumatic wheels. One of the transport wheels 
is fitted with a suitable attachment to transmit the motion of the wheel to the seed metering 
mechanism when the drill is in operation. 
TYPES OF SEED METERING MECHANISMS 
Some of the seed metering mechanisms used in seed drills are explained here. 
 
(a) Fluted feed type 
The fluted wheel also known as fluted roller is driven by a square shaft. There are horizontal 
groves provided along the outer periphery of the wheel and wheel can be shifted sideways 
depending upon the seed rate. These rollers are mounted at the bottom of the seed box. They 
receive the seeds in the longitudinal groves and pass on to the seed tube through the seed hole. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
86 
 
 
 
 
b) Internal double run type 
The internal double run feed mechanism has a double face wheel. One face has a larger 
opening for course seeds while other face has smaller openings for small seeds. Flapper gate is 
provided at the bottom of the box which covers the opening not in use. The rate of seeding is 
controlled by changing the speed of the internal feed wheels. This is done by meshing 
appropriate gears. 
 
Internal double run 
(c) Cup feed mechanism 
The mechanism consists of a circular shaft mounted with many circular discs. Each disc is 
provided with several cups or spoons in a circular path...This arrangement is kept at the 
bottom of the seed box. When the shaft rotates, the discs also rotates. Seeds are picked up by 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
87 
the cups and then dropped in to a funnel from where the seeds travel through the seed tube 
and reach the furrows. The cups have two faces, one for larger seeds and the other for smaller 
seeds 
 
 
Fig 8. Cup feed mechanism 
(d) Cell feed mechanism - It is a mechanism in which seeds are collected and delivered by a 
series of equally spaced cells engraved  on the periphery of a circular plate or wheel. 
 (e) Brush feed mechanism - It is a mechanism in which a rotating brush regulates the flow of 
seed from the hopper in to the seed tube. A number of bullock drawn planters in the country 
use brush feed mechanism.  
(g) Picker wheel mechanism - It is a mechanism in which a vertical plate provided with 
radially projected arms  picks up and drop the seeds in to the furrow. It is suialble for large 
size seeds like potatoes. 
(h) Star wheel mechanism - It is a feed mechanism which consists of a toothed wheel, rotating 
in a horizontal plane and conveying the fertilizer through a feed gate below the Star wheel. 
(f) Auger feed mechanism - It consists of an auger which moves the substance from the 
container and delivers in to the field uniformly.  Fertilizer drills are usually provided with 
auger feed mechanism. Some manufacturers use this mechanism in seed drills also. 
TYPES OF FURROW OPENERS 
The furrow openers are provided in a seed drill for opening a furrow. The seeds travel 
through the seed tube and reach the furrow 
Different type of furrow openers are: in use (1) Shovel type (2) Shoe type (3) hoe type 4) Disc 
Type (single disc, double disc).etc 
(1) Shovel Type 
Shovel type furrow openers are widely used in seed drills. There are three types of shovels in 
use. They are: (a) reversible shovel (b) single point shovel and (c) spear head shovel. 
Shovel type openers are best suited for stony and root infested fields. The shovels are bolted to 
the shanks at their bottoms.  Boots are fitted at the back of the shovels which carry the delivery 
ends of the seed tubes. In cultivator type seed drills shovel type furrow openers are used.   

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
88 
(2) Shoe Type 
It works well in trashy soils where the seed beds are not smoothly prepared. They are made 
from two flat pieces of steel welded together to from a cutting edge. It is specially suited for 
black soils. Bullock drawn three tyne seed drills are provided with shoe type furrow openers. 
(3) Disc Type 
They are two types: (a) Single disc and (b) Double disc types. 
Single disc type 
Disc type furrow openers are suitable to fields where plant residues or trashes are used 
as mulches. It consists of a curved disc made of hardened steel. It is set at an angle which while 
working shifts the soil to one side making a small furrow. Seeds are placed in the furrows. The 
disc is kept clean by two scrapers, one toe shaped at the convex side and one „T‟ shaped at the 
concave side. It works well in sticky soils also, but the discs are costly and maintenance is bit 
difficult. 
Double disc type 
In double disc furrow opener there are two flat discs, set at an angle to each other. The discs 
open a clean furrow and leave a small ridge in the center. The seeds are dropped between the 
two discs, providing more accurate placement. It is suitable for trashy lands. Seed drills 
operated at high speeds; usually use this type of furrow openers. 
Seed tube - Seed tubes are provided at the lower end of the feed cups.  They conduct seeds 
from feed cups to the furrow lines through suitable boots and furrow openers Polypropylene, 
rubber and steel tubes are used as seed tubes.. Minimum diameter of seed and fertilizer tube is 
25 mm. Boot - It is a part of the sowing equipment which receives the seeds or fertilizers from 
the seed tube and delivers to the furrow. It is made up of cast iron or mild steel. 
TYPES OF FURROW CLOSERS 
Drag chain, drag bars, scraper blades, steel press wheels, zero- pressure pneumatic press 
wheels, disc hillers and various combination of these are used as furrow closers. 
PLANTER 
Planter is a sowing equipment used for sowing those seeds which are larger in size and cannot 
be handled by seed drills. Row to row and plant to plant spacing is maintained in a planter. 
Potato planter, maize planter , cotton planter are popularly used 
Functions of a planter:  
 (i) to open the furrow 
 (ii) to meter the seed  
(iii) to deposit the seed in the furrow 
 (iv) to cover the seed and compact the soil over the seed.  
Components of a planter:  
A planter consists of:  

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
89 
(i) hopper 
(ii) feed metering device  
(iii) knock out mechanism 
(iv) cut-off mechanism  
(v) furrow opener 
(vi) furrow closer 
(vii) Drive mechanism (viii) clutch etc..  
A planter has separate seed hopper for each row.  Hopper is usually made of mild steel or any 
other suitable material. 
 
Seed metering device in a planter:  There are a number of seed metering devices available for 
use in a planter. The most common device is a rotating circular plate with cells which 
is provided at the bottom of seed hoppers.  In some planters, vertical rotors, inclined rotors , 
canvas belts are also used The circular seed plates have notches or holes provided along the 
periphery called cells which pick up the seeds from seed hopper and drop them in to the seed 
tube.  Depending upon the type of notches provided on the plates, the rotor is further 
classified in to.  (i) Edge drop (ii) Flat drop and (iii) Hill drop rotors.  The cells carry the seeds 
in the cells of the rotor.  The flat drop cell carries the seed on a platform of thickness half of the 
cell depth.  Only one seed is allowed in the cell each time.  In hill drop rotor, the cells are larger 
in size and admit many seeds at a time. 
The rotating plate receives the seeds from the hopper.  The plate moves under an arrangement 
called cut-off which allows only those seeds which are accommodated in the cells. 
 
 
Cut-off mechanism: It cuts-off or brushes out or removes  the excess seeds carried away by the 
 cells thus allowing corrected number of seeds for delivery. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
90 
Knock out mechanism: It is a device which knocks out the seeds from the rotor cells .  It 
consists of rollers or star wheels which by pressure releases the seeds from the cells. Seeds  fall 
in to the seed tube and reach the furrow. 
Spacing of seeds or hills: The spacing of seeds or hills in the row is determined by the ratio of 
peripheral speed of the rotor to the forward speed of the planter and the spacing between the 
cells in the rotor.  
The accuracy of the planter depends upon several factors such as: (i) speed of seed plate (ii) 
shape and size of cells (iii) shape of hopper bottom and (iv)uniformity of seed size. 
POTATO PLANTER 
Potato is an important crop in India. It requires a lot of labour for sowing in the fields. Potato 
planter have two types of potato dropping mechanisms namely i.) automatic  and  ii). Semi-
automatic. 
POTATO PLANTER (AUTOMATIC SEED DROPPING) 
The automatic potato planter consists of a hopper for each row and cups with chain drive 
mechanism. The graded potatoes are picked up by the cups and carried to furrow opener 
spout and released in the furrows. A feeder roller connected to the compensating tray which 
carrying spare potatoes checks up each cup. If a cup is found empty, a potato is released from 
compensating tray ensuring uniform seed spacing with no missing .The fertiliser and pesticide 
can also be placed simultaneously. It can plant in 2-4 rows. Capacity is 6000- 14000 potatoes 
/hr. 
POTATO PLANTER ( SEMI-AUTOMATIC) 
 It is used for planting of potatoes. The semi automatic potato planter consists of a hopper , 
metering disc and furrow openers. The fertilizer application unit can be attached separately. 
The potatoes from the hopper are placed in the metering disc which contains several 
compartments. The metering disc is rotated by gear drive mechanism. The ridges are formed 
by the furrow opener‟s .The potatoes drop in the furrows due to gravity. It may plant in 2-4 
rows. Field capacity is 0.15-0.35 ha/hr. 
CALIBRATION OF SEED DRILL 
Laboratory testing of a seed drill to determine the rate of seed delivery is called calibration of a 
seed drill. This is done to ascertain whether a seed drill delivers the seed in accordance with 
the recommended seed rate or not. If any discrepancy is found between seed delivery of the 
drill and the recommended seed rate, then the seed metering mechanism is adjusted to deliver 
correct seed rate. This method avoids the difficulty of setting the seed delivery rate of the seed 
drill in actual field conditions.  
Procedure 
i. Determine the width of sowing of seed drill (W)  

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
91 
W = M x S,  metre 
                          Where,  M = number of furrow openers 
                        S = Spacing between the furrow openers,  meter  
 Find the length of the strip of land (L) for an area of  1/25  ha taking the width of 
sowing as  cover 1/25 ha 
L    =   (1 /25)  x 10000 m2) x 1/ w  , meter 
      =  400/W  
iii. Determine the number of revolutions (N) of the ground wheel of the seed drill required to 
cover a strip of length  L meter 
L   = P x D x N = 400/W metre 
N = 400  P x D / W      revolutions per minute 
iv. Jack the seed drill so that the drive wheel turn freely. Make a mark on the drive wheel and 
a corresponding mark at a convenient place on the body of the drill to help counting the 
revolutions of the drive wheel 
v. Fill the seed in the seed hopper. Place a container under each boot for collecting the seeds 
dropped from the hopper 
vi. Set the seed rate control adjustment for maximum position and mark this position on the 
control for reference 
 Engage the clutch and rotate the ground wheel for N revolutions 
  ( N =  400 Π D / W) 
viii. Weigh the quantity of seed collected in the container and record the observation  Ws  kg 
ix. Calculate the  seed rate in kg/ha 
Calculation: 
Seed collected for an area of 400 m2  = Ws  kg 
Seed rate per hectare =   kg/ha 
x. If the calculated seed rate is higher or lower than the desired rate of selected crop, repeat the 
process by adjusting the seed rate control adjustment till the desired seed rate is obtained. 
SOLVED EXAMPLES 
1. Calculate the cost of sowing one hectare of land with a bullock drawn seed drill of size 5 x 
22 cm.  The speed of bullocks is 3 km/hr.  Hire charge for bullocks is Rs.100/- per pair/ day, 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
92 
hire charge for seed drill is Rs.50 /- per day and wages for  operator is Rs.100/- per day of 8 
hours. 
Sol: Width of seed drill = 5x22 = 110 cm = 1.1 m 
Area covered,  FCT =  
Time taken to cover one hectare =   1/FCT   =     1/0.33 = 3.03 hrs.  
Cost of sowing / ha   =    
2   The following results were obtained while calibrating a seed drill.  Calculate the seed rate 
per hectare. 
(i)  No. of furrows = 10 (ii) Spacing between furrows = 20 cm (iii) Diameter      of   drive wheel 
= 1.5 meter (iv) Revolutions of ground wheel rotated for  seed delivery  = 500 (v) seed collected 
= 20 kg. 
           Solution;   width of seed drill = 10 x 20 cm = 2 m 
          Circumference of drive wheel =  Õ x 1.5 m 
          Area covered in one revolution = Õ x 1.5 x 2 m 2 
          Area covered in 500 revolution   = Õ x 1.5 x 2 x 500 = 4712.3m2 
           Seed dropped for 500 revolutions=  20 kg 
20 x 10000 
Seed delivery rate =    ------------------- = 42.22  kg / ha. 
   4712.3 
 
3. Calculate the time required for sowing 1.6 hectares of land by a five furrow seed drill   
   working at 12.5 cm deep.  The speed of seed drill is 3.2 km/hr and pressure exerted by   
   the soil on the seed drill is 0.42 kg/cm2.  The space between furrow openers is 10 cm   
   and time loss in turning is 10%. 
Solution:  
width of sowing   =  5 x 10 cm  = 0. 50 m                                                          
Actual   Field capacity   FCA  =    =  0.144  ha/h Time needed for sowing 1.6 ha  =  
1.6 /0.144  =  11.1 h 
 
4.  Calculate the seed rate of a 7 x 17 cm seed drill whose main drive wheel diameter is    124 
cm and total weight of grain collected in 20 revolutions is 0.423 kg. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
93 
Sol. Width of operation    =  7 x 17 =  119 cm =  1.19 m 
Circumference of main drive wheel = Õ x 1.24    = 3.90 m 
Area covered per revolution = 1.19 x 3.9 = 4.64 m 
No. of revolutions/ha  =    = 2155.17 revolutions 
Seed collected in 20 revolutions =  0.423 kg  
Seed rate of the drill =  = 45.58 kg/ha 
 
MODEL QUESTIONS 
1. State the requirements of perfect sowing 
2. Compare broadcasting with drill sowing 
3. Compare check row planting with transplanting 
4. What are the functions of a seed drill?  
5. State the advantages of using seed drills. 
6. List the types of seed metering mechanisms 
7. Mention the components of a seed drill with a neat sketch and explain their 
     importance 
8. Differentiate seed drill and seed planter. 
9. Mention the different types of furrow openers and their uses. 
10. What is calibration of seed drill 
11. The following observations are recorded while calibrating the seed drill.  
Number of furrows = 10 
Spacing between the furrows = 20 cm 
Diameter of the ground wheel = 1.5 m 
Speed of rotation of ground wheel = 500 
Weight of seed collected = 20 kg. 
Calculate the seed rate. 
12. Seed metering mechanism used in cultivator seed drill is 
         a. Fluted rollers   b.  Cup feed mechanism   c. Brush feed mechanism                      
         d. Auger feed mechanism 
13. In most of the seed drills drive for seed metering mechanism is taken from  
         a. PTO shaft   b. Engine  c. Hydraulic system  d.  Ground wheel 
14. A five row 20 cm manual transplanter is pulled at a speed of 1.0 km/h. How much area 
will be planted in one day of 8 hours if field efficiency is 80 % 
a.  0. 50 ha    b.  0.60 ha    c. 0.64 ha   d. 0.70 ha 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
94 
15. Knock out mechanism is a device which knocks out the seeds from the cells    
       Or      picker  heads of the mechanism.  True/False 
 
16. Dropping of seeds in furrow lines in a continuous flow and covering them 
 with soil is called as 
a. Hill dropping b. check row planting   c. drilling d. Broadcasting 
 
17. The mechanism used to meter fertilizer in seed cum fertilizer drill is 
         a. Fluted rollers    b.  Cup feed mechanism   
c. edge drop rotor           d. Auger feed mechanism 
 
18.  In most of the seed drills drive for seed metering mechanism is taken from  
         a. PTO shaft   b. Engine  c. Hydraulic system  d.  Ground wheel  
 
19. In seed metering mechanisms used in planters the device which knocks out the seeds from 
the cells  is called  
        a. Fluted rollers   b. Cut-off mechanism   
 c. Knock-out mechanism  d. Drive wheel 
 
20. Knock out mechanism  in the seed metering system of a planter brushes 
 out excess seeds from the rotor   true/false 
 
21. Calculate the cost of seeding one hectare of land with bullock drawn seed drill of size 5x22 
cm. the speed of bullocks is 3 km/h. Hire charges of bullocks is Rs. 150/day.. Hire charges of 
seed drill is Rs. 100/day. Of 8 hours.  
 
22. A flutted feed seed drill has 8 furrow openers of single disc type. The furrow openers are 
spaced 25 cm apart and the main drive wheel  has a diameter of 120 cm. How many turns of 
main drive wheel would occur when the seed drill has covered 1.0 ha of land. 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
95 
 
 
 
Lecture 09 
PADDY TRANSPLANTERS, TYPES, WORKING PRINCIPLE, FIELD AND 
NURSERY REQUIREMENTS 
Transplanter is equipment used for transplanting mat type paddy seedlings in the main field. 
It is suitable for all types of paddy varieties grown by transplanting. Both manually operated 
and mechanically operated transplanters are available. Before transplanting, the field has to be 
puddled well and allowed for one or two days for consolidation of soil so that the machine can 
work without sinkage. 
 MANUAL RICE PLANTER 
The machine consists of a seedling tray, six numbers of forks, handle and skids.  By pressing 
the handle, the forks pick-up the seedlings and plant them in 6 rows.  For every stroke of the 
handle the seedling tray moves sideways for uniform picking of seedlings by the forks.  The 
operator has to pull the machine after finishing planting in a row.  The row to row spacing is 
200 mm. Plant to plant spacing can be set as per space recommendation by pulling the unit 
manually to the required distance. It can cover 0.25 ha/ day. Two men labour are required one 
for pulling the unit and another for transporting the mat seedlings. It saves time and money 
when compared to manual transplanting 
  
     Six row manual rice transplanter 
 
SELF PROPELLED PADDY TRANSPLANTER  
The self propelled paddy transplanter consists of (i) Air cooled gasoline engine (ii) Main clutch 
(iii) Running clutch (iv) Planting clutch (v) Seedling table (vi) Float (vii) Star wheel (viii) 
Accelerator lever (ix) Ground wheel (x) Handle (xi) Four bar linkage mechanism etc. The 
planter is powered by a 1.2-1,8 HP petrol engine. 
Operation 
The mat seedlings of age 15-20 days are used for machine planting. Mats are placed on the 
seedling table. After starting the engine, the running clutch and planting clutch are operated.  
Four bar linkage mechanism picks up 3 or 4 seedlings in each fork at a time from the mat and 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
96 
plant them in the puddled soil.  A fiber glass float supports the machine on the soil while 
working in the field.  Two ground wheels driven by the gear box moves the unit.  There is a 
marker which demarcates the transplanting width while in operation. The machine maintains 
a row to row spacing of 28 cm to 30 cm and plant to plant spacing of 14 to 16 cm.  The planting 
capacity of the machine is about 0.05 to 0.1 hectare per hour Power requirement is about 1.2 to 
1.8 HP petrol engine.  It saves time and money when compared to manual transplanting. 
Drive for four bar mechanism 
Power from the engine goes to the main clutch from where it is divided into two routes, one 
goes to planting clutch and the other goes to running clutch. Unless the  planting clutch is 
operated , the four bar linkage mechanism does not work.  
  
Self propelled rice transplanter 
 
 
 
 
Self Propelled Rice Transplanter in Operation 
 
MODIFIED MAT NURSERY FOR MACHINE PLANTING  
A modified mat nursery establishes seedlings in a layer of soil mix, arranged on a firm surface. 
Seedlings are ready for planting within 15-20 days after seeding (DAS). The modified mat 
nursery uses less land, can be installed closer to the house than traditional field nurseries, and 
uses less labor for both transporting seedling mats and replanting. As a result, root damage is 
minimal while separating seedlings. 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
97 
Establishing a Modified Mat Nursery 
1. Seed: To plant 1 ha (with 2 seedlings/hill at 20 X 20 cm spacing), use 18-25 kg good quality 
seeds (i.e., >80% germination and  establishment).: Good seeds result in  lower seed rate, more 
uniform germination,  vigorous seedlings, less replanting, fewer  weeds, and 5-20% higher 
yields. 
2. Nursery area: Prepare 100 m2 nursery for each 1 ha to be planted. Select a level area near the 
house and/or a water source. If area is not sufficiently compacted, then spread a plastic sheet 
or banana leaves on the  marked area to prevent roots growing into soil. 
3. Soil mixture: Four (4) m3 of soil mix is needed for each 100 m2 of nursery. Mix 70- 80% soil 
+ 15-20% well-decomposed  organic manure + 5-10% rice hull or rice hull ash. Incorporate 
around 20 kg N/ha (1.5 kg powdered di-ammonium phosphate or 2.0 kg 15-15-15 powdered 
NPK fertilizer for every 100 m2 of nursery area). 
4. Pre-germinating seed: Soak the seeds for 24 h (some varieties may need longer to bud). 
Drain and incubate (cover and keep moist) the soaked seeds for 24 h. In this time, the seeds 
sprout (bud) and the first seed root grows to 2-3 mm long. 
5. Laying the soil mixture: Place a wooden frame of 0.5 m long, 1 m wide and 4-cm deep 
divided into 4 equal segments on the plastic sheet or banana leaves. Fill the frame almost to 
the top with the soil mixture. Cover the seed with soil mix and wet.  
6. Sowing: Sow the pre-germinated seeds uniformly and cover them with a thin layer of dry 
soil. (Approximately 1 seed/cm2)  
7. Soaking the seedbed: (a) Sprinkle water immediately to soak the bed. (b) Remove 
the wooden frame and continue the process (i.e., fill soil mix-sow seed-cover seed-water) until 
the required nursery area is completed. 
 
8. Watering: Water the nursery as needed to keep the soil moist. Protect the nursery from 
heavy rains for the first 5 days. If the nursery can be flooded then at 7 DAS, maintain a 1-cm 
water level around the mats. Drain the water 2 days before removing the seedling mats for 
transplanting  
9. Fertilizer topdressing (optional): If temperature and water are adequate, but the seedlings 
show yellowing (N deficiency). Sprinkle seedlings with 0.5% urea (1.5 kg Urea in 300 l 
water/100 m2).m   
10. Lifting seedling mats: Seedlings reach sufficient height for planting in 15-20 DAS. Lift the 
seedling mats and transport them to main field. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
98 
 
 
FIELD PREPARATION FOR RICE TRANSPLANTING 
Plough the filed 20-25 cm deep using a mould board plough or wooden plough to expose the 
eggs of harmful insects, pests and rhizomes of weeds. Keep the field flooded or saturated with 
water.  After two or three days, puddle the soil using a puddler three or four times with 
standing water and complete a week ahead of transplanting. Puddling helps to kill the weeds 
and buries them in puddle layer. The rate of germination of weeds is also reduced in 
subsequent growing period of crop. Puddling helps to create beneficial physical, biological 
and chemical conditions for the growth of rice plants. Soil surface is left in a more even 
condition. Apply uniformly half of nitrogen and total quantities of phosphorus and potash on 
drained surface at the time of last puddling and incorporate in the top 10-15 cm deep soil. 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
99 
 
 
Lecture 10 
IMPLEMENTS FOR INTERCULTURAL OPERATIONS – HOES, LONG 
HANDLED WEEDERS, CULTIVATORS, AND ROTARY TILLERS 
 
The operations performed in the field after sowing but before harvesting the crop are called as 
intercultural operations. Interculturing is described as breaking the upper surface of soil, 
uprooting the weeds (unwanted plants), aerating the soil, thereby promoting the activities of 
microorganism and making good mulch, so that moisture inside the field is properly retained 
from evaporation.. These operations are accomplished by means of many tools and 
equipments, such as hoes, cultivators, harrows, rotary hoes etc.  
HAND HOE 
            Hand hoe is the most popular manually operated weeding tool use in the farm. It 
consists of an iron blade and a wooden handle. The operator holds the handle and cuts the soil 
with the blade to a shallow depth of 2-3 cm thereby weeds are cut and soil is stirred. The 
handle is short (30-40cm long) hence the operator uses the tool in bending posture. The 
coverage is 5-7 cents per day. 
 
HOE COME RAKE 
The hoe cum rake is multipurpose hand tool, which consists of a flat blade on one side like 
powrah and prongs on the other side. The blade and prongs are either made from single stock 
with an eye in the centre or joined to an eye by welding. A wooden handle is fitted to the eye 
for operation. The flat blade is used for digging and rake side for weeding and collection of 
weeds and trashes. The hoe cum rake is a secondary nursery bed preparation tool and is used 
for lighter operations. The flat end of the tool is operated with impact action and rake end by 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
100 
LONG HANDLE WEEDERS 
Hand hoes exert greater strain on the operator because of the short handle with necessitates 
the operator to do weeding job in bent posture. To avoid this nowadays long handles are used 
in hoes and hence they are called as long handle weeders. The popular long handle weeders 
available are a) star type weeder b) peg type weeder. These weeders are also called as dry land 
weeders since they are used in dry lands 
a) Star type weeder : It is suitable for weeding in dry lands. It can be used in garden lands also 
when the soil moisture is low (10-15 %). One limitation is that it works well in line sown crops 
and not in broadcasted fields. It consists of a blade for cutting the weeds, a fulcrum wheel for 
push-pull movement and a long handle for easy operation. Long handle reduces strain on the 
operator.  The radial arms of the fulcrum wheel is cut in to star like projections and hence the 
name star type weeder. Star wheel is designed for loamy soils.The operating width of the 
blade is 120 mm.  The coverage is 0.05 ha/day. 
b) Peg type weeder:  It is suitable for weeding in dry lands. It can be used in garden lands also 
when the soil moisture is low ( 10-15 %). One limitation is that it works well in line sown crops 
and not in broadcasted fields. It consists of a blade for cutting the weeds, a fulcrum wheel for 
push-pull movement and a long handle for easy operation. Long handle reduces strain on the 
operator.  There are pegs welded on the periphery of the wheel hence the name peg type 
weeder. Peg type wheel is designed for clayey soils. The operating width of the blade is 120 
mm.  The coverage is 0.05 ha/day. 
Both star type and peg type weeders are also called as dry land weeders. 
 
c) Wheel hoe 
The wheel hoe is a widely accepted weeding tool for weeding and intercultural in row crops. It 
is a long handled tool operated by pushes and pull action. The general construction of wheel 
hoe comprises of a wheel, tool frame, a set of replaceable tools and a handle Different types of 
soil working tools such as straight blade, V -blade, sweep, shovel, etc. can be used for different 
works namely weeding , soil mulching, stirring etc. .Long handle reduces drudgery to 
operator. Wheel reduces energy requirement for pushing. All the soil working components of 
the tool are made from medium carbon steel. The coverage is 0.05 ha/day. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
101 
 
 
Cono weeder Cono weeder in operation 
 
CULTIVATORS 
            It is an implement for inter cultivation with laterally adjustable tines or discs to work 
between crop rows. This can be used for seed bed preparation and for sowing with seeding 
attachment. The times may have provision for vertical adjustments also. 
The cultivator can be 1) Disc cultivator, 2) Rotary cultivator, 3) Tine cultivator. 
Disc cultivator 
            It is a cultivator fitted with discs. 
Rotary cultivator 
            It is a cultivator with tines or blades mounted on a power driven horizontal shaft. 
Tine cultivator 
            It is a cultivator fitted with tines having shovels. 
The cultivator stirs the soil, and breaks the clods. The tines fitted on the frame of the cultivator 
comb the soil deeply in the field. A cultivator performs functions intermediate between those 
of plough and the harrow. Destruction of weeds is the primary function of a cultivator. The 
following are a few important functions performed by a cultivator. 
1. Destroy the weeds in the field. 
2. Aerate the soil for proper growth of crops. 
3. Conserve moisture by preparing mulch on the surface. 
4. To sow seeds when it is provided with sowing attachments. 
5. To prevent surface evaporation and encourage rapid infiltration of rain water 
into the soil. 
Depending upon the type of power available for the implement, the cultivator can be classified 
as 1) Tractor drawn, 2) Animal drawn. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
102 
Tractor Drawn Cultivator 
            It may be 1) Trailed type 2) Mounted type. 
Trailed type cultivator 
            It consists of a main frame which carries a number of cross members to which tines are 
fitted. At the forward end of the cultivator, there is a hitch arrangement for hitching purpose. 
A pair of wheels are provided  in the cultivator. The life is operated by both wheels 
simultaneously so that draft remains even and uniform. The height of the hitch is adjusted so 
that main frame remains horizontal over a range of depth setting. The tines in each row are 
spaced widely to allow free passage of the soil and trash around them. The tines in subsequent 
rows are staggered so that the implement can cover the entire width nicely. The depth of 
working is set roughly by adjusting the tine in their clamps and the final depth control is done 
by a screw lever. Usually the tynes are damaged due to turning the implement at the headland 
without lifting it up. Care should be taken to lift the tines off the ground before turning. 
Mounted Cultivator 
            Tractors fitted with hydraulic lift operate the mounted type cultivators. A rectangular 
frame of angle iron is mounted on three point hydraulic linkage of the tractor. The cross 
members carry the tines in two staggered lines. For actual cutting the soil, different types of 
shovels and sweeps are used. a few important shovels and sweeps are a) Single point shovel b) 
Double point shovel c) Spear head shovel d) Sweep e) Half sweep f)Furrower. 
            Depending upon the type of soil and crop, shovels are chosen for use on the cultivators. 
Usually tractor drawn cultivators are of two types, depending upon the flexibility and rigidity 
of tines (i) Cultivator with spring loaded tines (ii) Cultivator with rigid tynes. 
CULTIVATOR WITH SPRING LOADED TINES 
            A tine hinged to the frame and loaded with a spring so that it swings back when an 
obstacle is encountered, is called spring loaded line. Each of the tine of this type of cultivator is 
provided with two heavy coil springs, pre- tensioned to ensure minimum movement except 
when an obstacle is encountered. The springs operate, when the points strike at roots or large 
stones by allowing the tines to ride over the obstruction, thus preventing damage. On passing 
over the obstruction, the tines are automatically reset and work continues without 
interruption. The tines are made of high carbon steel and are held in proper alignment on the 
main frame members. This type of cultivator is particularly recommended for soils which are 
embedded with stones or stumps. A pair of gauge wheel is provided on the cultivator for 
controlling the depth of operation. The cultivator may be fitted with 7, 9, 11, 13 tines or more 
depending upon the requirements. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
103 
 
 
Tractor drawn cultivator- spring 
loaded tines 
Tractor drawn cultivator- spring 
loaded tines 
CULTIVATOR WITH RIGID TINES 
            Rigid tines of the cultivators are those tines which do not deflect during the work in the 
field. The tynes are bolted between angle braces, fastened to the main bars by sturdy clamps 
and bolts . No springs are available with these cultivators. Spacing of the tines is changed 
simply by slackening the bolts and sliding the braces to the desired position. Since rigid tines 
are mounted on the front and rear tool bars, the spacing between the tynes can be easily 
adjusted without getting the tines choked with stubbles of the previous crop or weed growth. 
A pair of gauge wheel is used for controlling the depth of operation.      
 
 
Rigid tyne cultivator       
 
TYPES OF SHOVELS AND SWEEPS USED IN TINE CULTIVATORS.  
Shovel type blades 
 Duplex shovel or spear head shovel – for sleeve type tines 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
104 
 Single point shovel – spring tooth 
 Double point or reversible shovel – for spring tooth 
Sweeps blades 
 Full sweep 
 Half sweep right 
 Half sweep left 
 High speed sweeps 
Type of soil, crops and weeds influence the use of a shovel or a sweep. Shovels and sweeps 
should be operated as shallow as possible to prevent pruning of roots from the plants thereby 
injuring the crop. Sweeps should be set almost flat. When the point is resting on the floor, or 
ground., the outer tip of the wing should be elevated only 3-6 mm above the floor. The shovels 
and sweeps should be set in between the crop rows 5 cm away and at equal distances on each 
side of the row to avoid any damage to the standing crop.  
Setting of blades in a cultivator 
            When the cultivator has two rows of blades, then the  blades are arranged in a 
staggered way between the two rows  
ANIMAL DRAWN CULTIVATOR 
a) Sweep 
It is an intercultural implement used for removing shallow rooted weeds in between crop 
rows.  It consists of V shaped blades with bevel edged wings called sweeps. The blades are 
fitted to the tines by means of counter sunk bolts and nuts and the tines are fitted to a frame. 
By skimming action under the soil at a shallow depth of 2 to 3 cm, the sweep blades cuts the 
weeds. By the cutting action the blades break the capillary passages in the soil and provide soil 
mulch for moisture conservation. The coverage is 1.75 to 2.5 ha/day. The salient features of the 
unit are: 
 Suitable for all row crops and soils; provides soil mulch and conserves soil moisture 
   
Animal drawn sweep 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
105 
b) Junior hoe 
            It is intercultural equipment used for weeding between the rows of standing crops. It 
consists of six numbers of curved tines fitted with reversible shovels and  attached to a 
framework with hitching arrangement. The tines are arranged in three rows in staggered way, 
A handle and beam are fixed to the framework for guiding and attaching the unit to the yoke 
of the animals. The spacing between the shovels can be adjusted according to the row spacing 
of the crop. The curved nature of tines gives spring action when struck against stones or roots 
and releases the tines from the obstacle. The coverage is 1.5 ha per day. 
 
Junior hoe 
c) Duck foot cultivator 
            It is a type rigid cultivator which is used mostly for shallow ploughing, destruction of 
weeds and retention of moisture. It consists of steel frame and rigid tines to which sweeps are 
attached. The implement is attached to the tractor with three point hitch system and is 
controlled by hydraulic system. The sweeps are fabricated from high carbon steel. Number of 
sweeps can be reduced according to requirement. Usually this cultivator is about 225 cm long; 
60 cm wide with 7 sweeps. 
ENGINE OPERATED WEEDER 
It is used for both intercultural and secondary tillage operations namely stirring the soil, 
uprooting the weeds, breaking clods, covering seeds etc It consists of a 3-hp engine (petrol 
start kerosene run), a pair of ground wheels, a cultivator frame  with sweep or shovel blades, 
steering clutch, main clutch, handle , a tail wheel and other control levers.  The engine power 
is transmitted to ground wheels through belt-pulley and sprocket - chain mechanisms. Ground 
wheels act as traction wheels and pull the cultivator when moving; The tines to be set between 
rows with sufficient space away from plant stems. To avoid any damage to plants. The tail 
wheel is provided at the rear of the cultivator frame by raising or lowering of which the 
operating depth of the blades can be altered.  The field capacity is 0.75 – 1.0 ha per day. The 
salient features of the unit are: 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
106 
 Useful for weeding in row crops like tapioca, cotton, sugarcane, maize, tomato and 
pulses whose rows spacing is more than 60 cm 
 Can be used for weeding in orchards, coconut and areca nut fields. 
 
ENGINE OPERATED ROTARY TILLER  
It is a walking type tiller used for plains and hilly regions. It is used for both intercultural and 
secondary tillage operations namely stirring the soil, uprooting the weeds, breaking clods, 
covering seeds etc It consists of a 3-hp engine (petrol start kerosene run), a rotor with L blades, 
rotor drive mechanism, handle and other control levers.  When engine power is transmitted to 
rotor, the rotor rotates and till the soil. The rotor rotates in the forward direction and hence 
there is a forward push facilitating the forward movement of the tiller. The field capacity is 
0.75 – 1.0 ha per day. The salient features of the unit are: 
 Useful for weeding in row crops like tapioca, cotton, sugarcane, maize, tomato and 
pulses whose rows spacing is more than 60 cm 
 Can be used for weeding in orchards, coconut and arecanut fields. 
 Suitable for hilly regions also 
 Depth of cut is 8-12 cm 
 
 
Engine operated rotary tiller Tractor  operated rotary tiller 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
107 
Model questions 
1. Define inter cultivation in agriculture. Mention some tools and implement used in inter 
cultivation 
2. Explain about blade harrow 
3. Explain about junior hoe 
4. Explain about engine operated weeder 
5. Mention the conditions where in you will use junior hoe 
6. Name two implements used for conserving soil moisture in dry lands 
7. List the types of weeders 
8. Mention a neat sketch and explain the components of cono weeder their 
9. Differentiate star and peg type weeders. 
10. state the advantages of long handled weeder 
A11.     Junior hoe is primarily used for  
a. breaking clods                     b. seed bed preparation                       
c. weeding                               d. none 
A 12.    The main advantage of using long handle weeders is 
a. Less drudgery to operator   b.  Less area of coverage 
d. Cheaper cost of weeder       d. Traditional tool 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
108 
 
 
 
Lecture 11 
SPRAYERS AND THEIR FUNCTIONS, CLASSIFICATION, MANUALLY 
OPERATED SPRAYERS, POWER SPRAYERS - DUSTERS, TYPES AND USES 
SPRAYERS 
 
Sprayer is a machine used to apply liquid chemicals on plants to control pest and diseases. It 
can also be used to apply herbicides to control weeds and to spray micro-nutrients to enhance 
plant growth 
The main functions of a sprayer are 
 Breaking the chemical solution in to fine droplets of effective size. 
 Distributing the droplets uniformly over the plants. 
 Applying the chemicals with sufficient pressure for positive reaching the plants 
 Regulating the amount of liquid applied on plants to avoid excessive application. 
Desirable quality of a sprayer 
        A good sprayer should posses the following qualities 
 It should produce a steady stream of spray material in desired droplet size so that the 
plants to be treated may be covered uniformly. 
 It should deliver the liquid at sufficient pressure so that the spray solution reaches all 
the foliage and spreads uniformly over the plant body. 
 It should be light in weight yet sufficiently strong, easily workable and repairable. 
DIFFERENT SPRAYERS AT A GLANCE 
 
 
 
Hand-held-sprayers  Nozzle and pump of hand-Backpack sprayer 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
109 
held sprayer 
 
  
    Knapsack Hand Sprayer Stainless Steel and Brass 
knapsack sprayers 
Brass tank knapsack sprayers 
  
 
Stirrup sprayer Rocker sprayer   Hand compression spray  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
110 
 
 
 
Pedal operated pump knapsack power sprayer Knapsack Power Sprayer cum 
duster 
 
 
 
High power pump for 
sprayers 
Trailer Sprayer (with Snyder 
Super poly Tank) 
300 gallon 3pt. mounted 
sprayers 
  
Tractor mounted field sprayers   Trailer type Orchard sprayers  
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
111 
BASIC COMPONENTS OF A SPRAYER 
Components of a sprayer are as follows 
1. Pump b) Chemical tank c) agitator d) Air chamber e) pressure gauge f) Pressure 
regulator g) valves h) Strainer i) suction line j) delivery line k) nozzles 
Pump: A pump is a device used to move fluids, such as liquids or slurries, or gases from one 
place to another. A pump displaces a volume by physical or mechanical action. Most hydraulic 
sprayers are equipped with positive displacement pumps capable of developing pressure, 
required for many spraying jobs. The discharge capacity of these pumps is approximately 
proportional to the speed. A pressure relief valve or by-pass valve is required to protect these 
positive acting pumps from damage when the discharge line is closed and for the convenience 
of the operator. 
Tank: It is the container to hold the chemical solution. It is made up of PVC, Brass, etc. It is 
usually made of metal sheet or synthetic rubber or plastic having good resistant quality 
against corrosion, erosion, and similar actions. The size of the tank varies according to the 
pump capacity and the requirements. 
Agitator: It is the device which stirs the solution and keep the contents in homogenous 
condition. Positive agitation of spray material in the tank is essential to permit using the full 
range of spray materials including powdery emulsions, fungicides, cold water paints or other 
spray material. The propeller or paddle type mechanical agitators or hydraulic agitators are 
very common.  
Air chamber: In a reciprocating type pump, an air chamber is provided on the discharge line 
of the pump to level out the pulsations of the pump and thus providing a constant nozzle 
pressure 
Pressure gauge: It is a dial gauge which indicates the pressure at which the liquid is delivered 
from the pump. A pressure gauge properly calibrated, within the pressure range of the pump 
is provided on the discharge line to guide the operator for making proper adjustment of the 
pressure at site. 
Pressure regulator: The pressure regulator serves several important functions. It is the means 
of adjusting the pressure as required for any spray job within the pressure range of the pump. 
With the positive displacement type of pump, it also serves as a safety device in automatically 
unloading the excess pressure by directing the unused discharge flow from pump back to the 
tank. 
Valves: A valve is a device that regulates the flow of a fluid (gases, liquids, fluidized solids, or 
slurries) by opening, closing, or partially obstructing various passageways.  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
112 
Cut-off valve is provided in the delivery line to control the flow from the pump, 
By-pass valve is provided in the delivery line to by-pass the flow from pump to tank when 
flow in delivery line is reduced than the pump capacity  
Relief valve - It is an automatic device to control the pressure of fluid or gas within a range a 
predetermined pressure. 
Strainer: It is a small circular plastic ring with nylon wire mesh to filter any dust particle 
coming with the chemical solution  It is  included in the suction line between the chemical tank 
and the check valves. In some sprayers strainers are provided at the mouth of the chemical 
tank. eg. Knapsack sprayers 
Nozzles: It is the component which breaks the fluid in to fine droplet. Automation of spray 
fluid is usually achieved by discharging the liquid through an orifice called nozzle under 
pressure. Atomization is also achieved by breaking up the jet of liquid with a blast of air.  
Spray gun - It is a hand held metallic of PVC pipe to one end of which the nozzle is fitted and 
a flow cut off valve and a handle are fitted at the other end. The delivery hose is connected to 
the spray gun. It conducts the fluid from the delivery hose to the nozzle. The operator holds 
the gun and does the spraying job. Area of coverage by a spray gun is less compared to the 
coverage of a spray boom. Spray guns are used with low power sprayers E.g. Knapsack 
sprayers, rocker sprayer. 
Spray boom - It is a long metallic or PVC pipe to which several nozzles are fitted with. The 
delivery hose is connected to the spray gun. High power and high capacity sprayers use spray 
booms. The coverage is larger compared to spray guns. Booms are usually mounted on 
suitable structures and used.  E.g. Tractor operated sprayers, power tiller operated sprayers. 
Over-flow pipe - It is a conduit pipe through which excess fluid from a pump is by-passed in 
to chemical tank by the action of a relief valve or pressure regulator. 
COMPONENTS A OF NOZZLE 
Nozzle body - It is the main component which encloses all other components of a nozzle. 
Swirls plate -   It is metal disc with two tangential holes which imparts a swirl or rotation to 
the liquid passing through it. 
Nozzle disc - It is the component which breaks the fluid in to fine droplet. It is a flat disc with 
an orifice at the centre. When the spray solution reaches the disc from the swirl plate the disc 
builds up further pressure on the fluid and when the fluid passes out of the orifice, it breaks in 
to fine droplets. The disc has a specific design to impart a hollow cone or solid cone or a flat 
fan type of discharge to the outgoing fluid.  
The popular nozzles are a) hollow cone b) solid cone c) fan or flat type 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
113 
Strainer- It is a small circular plastic ring with nylon wire mesh to filter any dust particle 
coming with the chemical solution 
Spacer: There are two number of runner/ plastic rings placed in between nozzle plate and 
swirl plate and between swirl plate and strainer for effective travel of the solution 
TYPES OF SPRAYERS 
            Based up on the volume of liquid handled ,sprayers may be  classified in to 
1. High volume sprayer (more than 400 litres /ha) 
2. Low volume sprayer (5 to 400 litres/ hectare) 
3. Ultra low volume sprayer (ULV) spray (less than 5 litres /ha). 
            The selection technique depends up on type of vegetation, kind of pests and approach 
to the field. 
ULTRA LOW VOLUME SPRAYER 
            ULV Sprayer is used to spray chemicals on row crops like cotton, cowpea, groundnuts ,  
tobacco and vegetables. It is ideally suited for home gardens.  It is a hand-held sprayer with a 
spinning / rotating disc designed for ultra-low volume (ULV) and  controlled droplet 
application of insecticides, fungicides, pesticides, herbicides and all liquids. Rotating disc 
technology ensures efficient liquid atomization to give appropriate droplet size. ULV 
formulations are applied at only 2.5-7.5 litres / ha. One hectare of crop can be treated in 
around 2.5 hour 
HAND ATOMIZER 
This sprayer is also ideally suited for home gardens and small fields. It consists of a container 
of 0.5 to 3.51it capacity a built in air pump, pressure gauge , nozzle and flow cut off  lever. The 
tank is to be filled with ¾ th volume. The pump is operated to build pressure in the tank of 
0.15-0.3 kg/cm2 . When the   flow cut off lever is pressed , the fluid passes through the nozzle 
and spraying is done. The application rate ranges from 45 to 100 litres /ha. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
114 
 
 
Hand atomizer 
HAND COMPRESSION SPRAYER 
It is suitable for applying chemicals for field crops and lawns. Similar to  hand atomizer this 
sprayer also consists of a tank of 10-12 lit capacity  for holding spray material , a vertical air 
pump , pressure gauge, filling port, spray lance , nozzle and a flow control lever. The chemical 
tank is filled 75-80 % volume .The pump is operated to pump air in to the tank to build 
pressure up to 2.0 – 3.5 kg/cm2. When the   flow cut off lever is pressed, the fluid passes 
through the nozzle and spraying is done. The sprayer is carried on the shoulder of the 
operator. The application rate ranges from 45 to 100 litres /ha. 
 
 
 
Hand compression sprayer            
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
115 
KNAPSACK SPRAYER (HAND OPERATED) 
     
 
This sprayer is suitable for applying chemicals to several field crops. The operator carries the 
sprayer on his back and hence the name knapsack sprayer. It has a flat or bean-shaped tank of 
10-15 litres capacity., a hydraulic pump fitted inside the tank, a handle to operate the pump, 
agitator, filter, delivery hose, and spray gun with nozzle and flow control lever.  The tank is 
made of either brass or PVC material. The tank is filled with chemical solution. When the 
pump is operated, it draws the fluid through the suction hole and delivers it to the spray gun, 
When the cut off lever is pressed spraying is done through the nozzle as fine droplets. The 
pressure developed in these sprayers depends on the pump and varies from 3 to 12 kg/cm2 
The application rate is 500 lit/ha. The coverage is 0.5-1.0 ha/day. 
Salient features of knapsack sprayers. 
1. Useful to develop high pressure with less effort. 
2. Light in weight and easy to carry on the back of the operator.. 
3. High work rate and economical. 
4. Robust and simple to maintain. 
5. Both left and right hand operation 
6.10-15 lit. capacity 
7. Easy to spray chemicals. 
 
ROCKER SPRAYER 
            Rocker sprayer is mainly used for spraying fruit trees in orchards, coconut and areca 
nut trees, flower gardens, and cotton and tapioca fields. It consists of a piston type pump, a 
platform with fork, a lever to operate the pump, pressure chamber, suction hose with strainer, 
delivery hose, and a spray gun with flow control knob and nozzle. The pump builds up a 
pressure up to 14-18 kg/cm2 which facilitates the use of the sprayer for tree spraying. The 
Pressure chamber helps for continuous spraying. The chemical is taken in a separate container 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
116 
and the suction hose is kept in the chemical container. When the pump is operated, it draws 
the fluid through the suction hose and delivers it to the delivery hose through the pressure 
chamber. When the flow control knob is turned, the fluid is sprayed through the nozzle. The 
output of the sprayer is 70-90 lit/hr with one nozzle. Coverage is about 1.5 ha/day. 
 
 
Rocker sprayer Rocker sprayer 
 
FOOT OR PEDAL OPERATED SPRAYER  
The foot or pedal sprayers, as they are commonly called, consist of a plunger assembly, stand, 
suction hose, delivery hose, spray gun  with a nozzle etc.  One end of the suction hose is fitted 
with a strainer and the other end is connected to the pump inlet opening.  Similarly, the 
delivery hose is fitted at one end to the delivery opening of the pump and the other end to the 
spray gun.  Constant pedaling is required for continuous spray.  It develops a pressure of 17-
21 kg/cm2. The chemical is taken in a separate container and the suction hose is kept in the 
chemical container. When the pump is operated by the foot, it draws the fluid through the 
suction hose and delivers it to the delivery hose.  When the flow control lever is pressed, the 
fluid is sprayed through the nozzle. Agitation of chemical solution is done by supplying a 
portion of air from the blower, The discharge rate with one nozzle is 110-135 l/hr and 
coverage is 1.0 ha/day 
KNAPSACK MOTORIZED MIST BLOWER CUM DUSTER 
It is the simplest engine driven sprayer used in agriculture. It is carried on the back of the 
operator. It is used for spraying to all types of field crops most popularly to paddy, groundnut, 
cotton and vegetable crops. It consists of a 1.2- 3.0 hp high speed petrol engine, a blower, a 12 
lit chemical tank, delivery hose, fleeted air hose, flow regulator knob and a plastic atomizer 
grate. The tank is filled with the required chemical solution. When the engine is started, the 
blower generates a high velocity air to which the chemical solution is fed. The chemical mixed 
air stream is broken in to fine droplets at the atomizer grate and sprayed. . By changing few 
parts the sprayer can be converted in to a duster. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
117 
 
 
Motorized Knapsack sprayer     Motorized Knapsack sprayer 
 
              
               Motorized Knapsack sprayer spraying chemicals to wheat crop. 
CONVERSION OF A MIST BLOWER IN TO A DUSTER 
1. Replace the liquid delivery hose by a bigger diameter pleated hose to carry the powdery 
 chemical from the tank into the air stream 
2. Provide a air distributor at the bottom of the tank for stirring and keeping the  chemical 
in suspended form 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
118 
   
    Motorized Knapsack duster        
POWER SPRAYER 
It is a heavy duty and efficient sprayer. It consists of a triplex pump with stainless steel piston 
with oil bath lubrication. It can Develops 250 to 350 pounds pressure and can deliver the 
solution up to  15 m.. It can be powered by a  3 HP engine or electric motor .It is convenient to 
spray with 4 to 6 spray lances at a time using the sprayer. There are sprayers can be operated 
by tractor PTO as well as  by a power tiller.. 
              
Power sprayer 
DUSTER 
            Duster is a machine used to apply chemicals in dust form. Dusters make use of air 
stream to carry pesticides in finely divided form on the plants. A duster essentially consists of  
1. Hopper                    2. Agitator 
3. Feed control            4. fan or blower 
5. Delivery nozzle 
Types of dusters 
            1. Plunger type                        2. Knapsack type 
3. Rotary type             4. Power operated duster 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
119 
1. Plunger type - it is a simple duster with a small piston. The piston drives a current of 
air over the dust in the hopper. The dust is carried away through a delivery spout. 
Small hand pump dusters of this type are available and are suitable only where the area 
to be dusted is  small like vegetable gardens 
2. Knapsack type - It is a duster with the powder container carried on the back of the 
operator. Knapsack dusters have a hopper through which a current of air is blown to 
pick up the dust. The air current is produced by a lever operated leather bellows. 
Shoulder straps are used to carry in the field. These dusters are suitable for small areas. 
3. Rotary duster – Hand rotary dusters are useful to apply chemicals which are in powder 
form.  It consists of a hopper, a fan, gear box, handle, delivery hose and a deflector 
plate. When the handle is rotates the fan rotates at high speed and draws air from 
outside. The chemical from hopper is fed in to the air stream in the suction side of the 
fan. The chemical mixes with the air, passes through the delivery line and is applied on 
the plants. The rate of delivery can be  regulated  It is used to apply powdery chemicals 
to vegetables, sorghum etc. crops. 
 
 
 
Hand rotary dusters  
1. Power operated duster- Power operated duster mainly consists of a power driven fan, a 
hopper and a delivery spout. The fan creates strong air flow which causes the dust to 
blow off from the hopper to a considerable distance vertically or horizontally. Direction 
of dust is regulated by a movable spout suitably fitted with the unit. This type of 
dusters are used for large areas 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
120 
      
Power operated dusters 
5. Arial duster or crop duster -   an aircraft is used for dusting or spraying large acreages with 
pesticides. Aerial spraying and dusting permit prompt coverage of large areas at the moment 
when application of pesticide is most effective and avoid the need for wheeled vehicles that 
might damage crops. The technique was greatly improved in the 1960s with the development 
of ultra-low-volume applicators, in which concentrated pesticides are distributed in amounts 
as small as 1 ounce per acre (70 grams per hectare).  
 
 
Arial dusting  
 
Important terms 
1. suction capacity of power sprayer- plunger type 
Q         = 2 x L x n x 10 -6 
Where 
Q- theoretical suction capacity in lit/min 
D- diameter of plunger, mm 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
121 
n- rev/min 
L- stroke length, mm 
B) Volumetric efficiency   
                                                    Actual suction capacity 
                                    =          ----------------------------------------  x 100 
                                                 Theoretical suction capacity  
C) Pump efficiency 
                                            Water horse power 
                                    =   --------------------------------- x 100 
                                            Shaft horse power 
            Water horse power, kW  
                                    =  kW 
MODEL QUESTIONS 
1. State the functions of sprayer 
2. Furnish the classifications of sprayers 
3. List the advantages of sprayers 
4. Mention the components and operation of hand sprayer 
5. Mention the components and operation of power sprayer 
6. Explain about different types of nozzles  
7. Mention the components of rocker sprayer with a neat sketch and explain their Importance 
8.         When several nozzles are fitted in a pipe it is called as Spray gun                            True / 
False 
9.         In battery operated sprayers the component which breaks the chemical  
Solution in to fine particles is called 
a. spray gun    b. nozzle          c. spinning disc           d. none  
10.       The chemical solution requirement of a sprayer is 80 lit/ha. The sprayer can  
be  classified under 
a. high volume sprayer                       b. low volume sprayer                         
c. ultra low volume sprayer                d. none 
11,       Sprayers can be used to apply 
a. herbicide     b. fungicide     c. insecticide   d. all the three chemicals 
12.       Which of the following components of a sprayer is very important? 
a. Spray gun   b. Cut-off lever    c. Nozzle   d. Strainer  
13        Cut off valve is fitted between pump and nozzle of a  
sprayer and is used to control the flow of chemical 
solution to the nozzle                                                  True / False      
14. Explain the components and working of motorized knap sack Sprayers 
15. State the advantages of knapsack motorized mist blower compared to hand sprayer 
16. Explain the parts and working of battery operated sprayer 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
122 
17. How will you convert a mist blower into a duster? 
18. Differentiate compression sprayer and battery operated sprayer. 
19. Calculate the water power which is required to discharge liquid @ 30 lit/min at 30 kg/cm2 
pressure 
20. In a pump, suction volume is 25 lit/min and pump efficiency is 85%. Calculate the shaft 
power at a pressure of 35 kg/cm2 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
123 
 
 
 
 
Lecture 12 
HARVESTING TOOLS AND EQUIPMENT- SICKLES, PADDY REAPERS 
AND COMBINE - HARVESTING MACHINERY FOR GROUNDNUT, 
TUBER CROPS – SUGARCANE HARVESTERS 
HARVESTING  
            The operation of cutting, picking, plucking digging or any combination of these for 
removing the whole crop or edible part of the crop from either under the ground or above the 
ground is called harvesting 
            Mechanical actions associate with harvesting are as follows: 
1. Slicing action with a sharp tool. 
2. Tearing action with a rough serrated edge 
3. Scissoring action. 
4. High velocity impact with sharp or dull edge tool. 
ACCORDING TO POWER SOURCE USED HARVESTING TOOLS CAN BE CLASSIFIES 
AS  
(1) Manually operated tools (ii) Animal drawn implements (iii) Power driven machines 
SICKLE           
Sickle is a simple manually operated harvesting tool. It is used for harvesting crops like paddy, 
ragi, sorghum etc. It essentially consists of a curved metallic blade and a wooden handle. 
Sickles are classified into two classes: (i) Plain and (ii) Serrated depending on the nature of the 
blade edge. In plain sickle the blade edge is smooth and sharp. In serrated sickle the blade 
edge is with sharp serrated teeth. The plain or serrated edge in the inner side of the blade is 
used for cutting the crop and hence called  cutting edge The forged end of the blade used for 
fixing the handle is called tang.. Harvesting by sickle is a very slow and labour consuming 
device. 
 
Sickle 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
124 
MOWER  
Mower is a machine to cut herbage crops and leave them in a swath. Animal drawn and 
tractor operated mowers are available 
According to the cutting tool mowers are classified in to the following types such as: (i) 
Cylinder mower (ii) Reciprocating mower (iii) Horizontal rotary mower (iv) Gang mower and 
(v) Flail mower. 
a) Cylinder mower: It has rotating helical blades arranged in cylindrical form. With the 
rotation of blades, forage or grasses are cut continuously. It is used for trimming grass in 
lawns, golf grounds etc.  
b) Reciprocating mower: It is a mower with a knife made of several serrated triangular 
sections that reciprocate against stationary fingers. The knife cuts the crop by its reciprocating 
action. It is the most common type of mower used for harvesting forage crops and food grain 
crops like paddy and wheat. .  
c) Horizontal rotary mower: It is a mower with high speed knife rotating in the horizontal 
plane. Due to rotation of knife, the grass and forage are cut uniformly. Used for trimming 
lawns , golf grounds etc. 
d) Gang mower: It is an assembly of two or more ground driven cylinder mowers. It is used 
for trimming grass in lawns, golf grounds etc.  
e) Flail mower: It is a mower with high speed swinging knives, operating either in the 
horizontal plane or in the vertical plane.. Used to cut herbaceous weeds like parthenium 
CONVENTIONAL MOWER  
The conventional mower mainly consists of: (i) A  metallic frame (ii) Power transmitting unit 
 and (iii) Cutting bar  
Frame  
The frame provides space for fitting gears, clutch, bearings, flywheel etc required for the 
operation of the harvester. A lever is used for lifting the cutting bar during road travel. . A 
flywheel is used to store energy from the engine to supply steady energy to the cutting 
mechanism for uniform cutting. 
Power transmitting unit  
            It transmits the power from the power source  either from the ground wheel in animal 
drawn mowers and from PTO  for tractor drawn mowers to the cutting tool.  
In bullock drawn mowers, the power transmitting unit consists of transport wheels, axle, 
gears, crank wheel, crankshaft and pitman. The transport wheel gives power to the axle from 
where the power is transmitted to crank wheel through the gears. From crank wheel the drive 
is transmitted to pitman through connecting rod. Crank wheel rotates in circular motion and 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
125 
pitman makes reciprocating motion. Connecting rod converts rotary motion in to reciprocating 
motion. Knife is connected to pitman hence the knife reciprocates and performs the cutting job. 
There is a ball and socket arrangement to connect the knife with the pitman. The operator 
controls the driving unit with the help of a dog clutch. 
In tractor drawn semi-mounted or mounted type mowers the cutter bar is operated by P.T.O. 
shaft of the tractor. A carden shaft transmits drive from PTO to the V pulley of the harvester. 
From V pulley, drive reaches the knife through gears, crank wheel, connecting rod and 
pitman. The knife reciprocates and cuts the crop. The cutting mechanism is driven 
independent of the forward motion of the tractor 
Cutter bar  
It is an assembly of several parts comprising of a knife, fingers, wearing plates, ledger plates, 
guides and shoes. The knife cuts the grass or grain crop by its reciprocating action`. It is a 
metallic rectangular bar, on which triangular sections are mounted. The knife sections make 
reciprocating motion inside the fingers and cuts the plants. There are knife guides with clips to 
keep the knife sections very closely on the ledger plates for effective cutting action. The knife 
stops at the centre of the knife guard (finger) on each stroke which indicates good 
registration..  
 
Cutter bar 
Shoe - A shoe is always provided on each end of the cutter bar to regulate the height of cut 
and to provide easy and smooth sliding of the cutter bar on the land. 
Ledger plate - It is a hardened metal inserted in a guard (finger) over which knife sections 
move to give a scissor like cutting action. 
Wearing plate - It is a hardened steel plate attached to the finger bar to form a bearing surface 
for the back of the knife. 
Knife - It is the reciprocating part of the cutter bar, comprising of knife head, knife back and 
knife sections. 
Knife section - It is a steel plate of triangular shape with two cutting edges. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
126 
Knife head -   It is the portion of the knife which is connected to the pitman. 
Knife back -   It is the strip of steel to which knife sections are riveted and the knife head is 
attached. 
Grass board – Grass board is provided at the outer end of the mower which causes the cut 
plants to fall towards the cut material.  
Pitman - Pitman is the link between the knife and crank wheel of the mower. It transmits 
motion to a knife. Wooden pitman is commonly used for the mowers which acts as safety 
device. It breaks and protects the cutter bar from damage when ever the knife is locked by 
some obstacle or choked by the crop. 
Connecting rod - It is placed between pitman and crank wheel. It converts rotary motion of 
crank wheel in to reciprocating motion of the knife. 
Breaking of knives - Breaking of knives is a common trouble in operation of a mower. It is 
caused due to play in bearings and worn out knife head holders. Non-alignment is an 
important cause for breaking the knife because when the mower is out of alignment, it works 
on a certain angle which is always harmful. 
Alignment of mower  
Under working condition, the standing crops exert pressure on the cutter bar tending to push 
it backward. In correct operating position, the crankpin, knife head and the outer end of the 
knife should be in a straight line. This line should be at right angle to the direction of travel of 
the mower. For achieving this object, the cutter bar is set at about 88° to the direction of motion 
i.e. inward lead of 2° is given to it in order to overcome the back pushing action of the crops. 
When the cutter bar is properly aligned, the knife and the pitman run in a straight line. This 
gives better cutting of the knife in the field. Generally 2cm lead per metre length of cutter bar 
is recommended.  
Registration of mower  
A mower knife is said to be in proper registration when the knife section stops in the centre of 
its guard ( fingers ) on every stroke i.e. the centre of the knife section is at the centre line of the 
guard, when it is in operating condition (Fig.3). Adjustment is commonly made by moving the 
entire cutter bar in or out with respect to the pitman. If mower is not well registered, there is 
unbalanced load, uneven cutting and excessive clogging of crops on the knife. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
127 
  
Registration of mower 
SELF PROPELLED PADDY HARVESTER 
It is suitable for harvesting non lodging varieties of paddy crop. The machine consists of an 
engine, gearbox, ground wheels, handle, and cutter bar assembly, star wheels and gathering 
header assembly. The power is taken from the engine pulley to the harvester main shaft 
through compound idlers. The crop is manually harvested along the four sides of the field for 
a width of 0.5m and cleared from the field for providing space to the machine. At one comer 
an area of 2.0 x 1.5m is manually harvested to place the machine initially in the field. Since the 
harvested crop is discharged at the right side of the reaper the machine has to be turned 
always to the left side. During forward motion of the harvester, crop enters in the cutter bar 
mechanism and gets sheared and the harvested crop is conveyed to right side of the machine 
by the conveyor belt . The harvested crop is windrowed in the field, collected manually and 
transported to threshing yard.  The width of operation is 1.0 metre. The coverage is 1.5 ha/day 
Advantages of using harvesters 
1. Labour requirement is reduced 
2. Large area can be harvested in shorter time. Saving in time 
3. The availability of a harvest in a locality supports labour force to complete larger area. 
Hence timely harvest is possible. 
4. Economical 
5. Frees the land early for ploughing for the next crop 
  
Paddy harvester  Paddy harvester 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
128 
TERMS CONNECTED WITH HARVESTING OPERATION 
Mower: It is a machine use to cut herbage crops and leave them in a swath. 
Reaper: It is a machine to cut grain crops. 
Reaper binder: It is a machine which cuts the crops and ties them into neat and uniform 
bundles.            
Sickle: It is a curved steel blade with sharp edge in the inner side and a handle. It is used  by 
human power. The person holds the tool and shears the straw or stalk and harvests the crop  
Swath: The harvested material laid on the land by  the machine when harvesting is in progress 
is called a swath. 
Windrow: It is a row of material formed by combining two or more swaths. 
Windrower: It is a machine to cut crops and deliver them in a uniform manner in  a row. 
COMBINE 
It is a machine, which performs the functions of a reaper, thresher and winnower. 
Functions 
1. Cutting the standing crops 
2. Feeding the cut crops with the threshing unit 
3. Threshing the crops 
4. Cleaning the grains freeing it from straw 
5. Collecting the grains in a container 
The functional components are 
1. Header 2. Reel 3. Cutter bar 4. Elevator canvas 5. Feeder canvas 6. Feeding drum 7. 
Threshing drum 8. Concave,  9. Fan   10.chaffer sieve 11. Grain sieve  12.grain auger 13. Tailing 
auger 14. Grain elevator and 15. Grain container. 
Header is used to cut and gather the crop and deliver it to the threshing cylinder.  The straw is 
pushed back on the platform by the reel. Small combines use scoop type headers, while large 
combines use T type headers 
Harvesting is done by a cutting unit, which uses the cutter bar similar to that of the mower.  
The knife has got serrated edge to prevent the straw from slipping while in operation.  There is 
a suitable cutting platform, which is provided with a real and canvas.   
The reel is made of wooden slates, which helps in feeding the crops to the cutting platform.  
The reel gets the power through suitable gears and shafts. The reel revolves in front of the 
cutter bar while working in the field. The reel pushes the standing crops towards the cutting 
unit. The reels are adjustable up and down as in or out.  The cutter bar of the combine operates 
like the cutter bar of a mower The conveyor feeds the crop to the cylinder and concave unit. 
The threshing takes place between the cylinder and concave unit of the combine. The basic 
components of the threshing unit of the combine are similar to a power thresher. As soon as 
the crops are threshed the threshed material move to straw racks. These racks keep on 
oscillating and separating the grains.  
The cleaning unit consists of a number of sieves and a fan. The unthreshed grains pass through 
the tailing auger and go for re-threshing.  The clean grain passes through the grain elevator 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
129 
and finally goes to the packing unit. Grains are collected in a hopper provided at suitable 
place.  The fan is adjusted such that the chaff etc., blown off the rear side of the machine. The 
size of the combine is indicated by width of cut it covers in the field. 
  
 
Paddy Harvester 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
130 
 
Wheat Harvester 
 
Straw Reaping in Wheat 
Combine harvester 
A combine may be self-propelled type and PTO driven type 
Self propelled type 
This has got its own dependent engine.  This engine gives power for operating all the 
mechanisms as well as for pulling the weight of the combine.  Size varies from 2-4 m. 
PTO driven type 
This combine is pulled by a tractor.  The tractor pulls the combine by its tractive power.  The 
power takes off shaft of the tractor supplies power to the cutting and threshing mechanisms.  

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
131 
The power requirement of the combine may be taken on 8 HP/m width of cut for pulled type 
machine and 12 HP/m width of cut for self propelled machines. 
MODEL QUESTIONS            
1. List the types of mowers 
2. Mention the basic components a mower 
3. Explain with a neat sketch the working of a cutter bar  
4. List the types of harvesting methods 
5. List the advantages of harvesters  
6. Mention the components of paddy harvester with a neat sketch and explain their 
importance 
7. Define registration and alignment 
8. Differentiate plain and serrated sickle. 
9. The machine which cuts the crops and ties them into a neat and uniform sheaves is known 
as  
a. reaper binder  b.  mower   c. harvester   d. none 
10. A mower knife is said to be in proper registration when the knife section stops in the centre 
of its guard on every stroke                             True/False 
11. The material as left by the harvesting machine. Is called swath              True/False 
12. The machine used to cut herbage crops is called 
a. reaper          b. windrower   c. mower         d. harvester 
13. Swinging knives are used in  
a. cylindrical mower    b. horizontal rotary mower      c. flail mower  d. reciprocating 
mower.           
14. Mention the components of combine harvester with a neat sketch and explain their 
importance 
15. Calculate total time required to harvest 2.5 ha of grass by means of a 2m mower being 
operated at 4 Kim/h. Take field efficiency as 80% 
16. How many hectares of land can be cut by a combine with 4 m cutter bar, when it is 
operating at 4km/h 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
132 
 
Lecture 13 
TOOLS FOR HORTICULTURAL CROPS – PROPAGATION TOOLS, 
PLANTERS AND HARVETING TOOLS AND MACHINERY 
 
PLANT PROPAGATION 
           Most plants reproduce more of their kind through production of seeds. This is sexual 
reproduction and it involves the exchange of genetic material between two parent plants. 
Many ornamental plants do not come "true" from seed. To increase the numbers of these 
plants, gardeners and horticulturists use asexual propagation. In asexual propagation, the new 
plants are genetically exact copies or clones of a single parent plant. The methods used in 
asexual propagation range from taking leaf cuttings of African violets to grafting apple 
cuttings onto root stocks. Fruit tree propagation is usually carried out through asexual 
reproduction by grafting or budding the desired variety onto a suitable rootstock.  
         GRAFTING is a method of asexual plant propagation widely used in agriculture and 
horticulture where the tissues of one plant are encouraged to fuse with those of another. It is 
most commonly used for the propagation of trees and shrubs grown commercially. (Grafting is 
limited to dicots and gymnosperms. Monocots lack the vascular cambium required). In most 
cases, one plant is selected for its roots, and this is called the stock or rootstock. The other 
plant is selected for its stems, leaves, flowers, or fruits and is called the scion. The scion 
contains the desired genes to be duplicated in future production by the stock/scion plant. 
      
      In stem grafting, a common grafting method, a shoot of a selected, desired plant cultivar is 
grafted onto the stock of another type. In another common form called budding, a dormant 
side bud is grafted on the stem of another stock plant, and when it has fused successfully, it is 
encouraged to grow by cutting out the stem above the new bud. 
           BUDDING is a grafting technique in which a single bud from the desired scion is used 
rather than an entire scion containing many buds. Most budding is done just before or during 
the growing season. However some species may be budded during the winter while they are 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
133 
dormant.   Budding requires the same precautions as grafting. Be sure that the scion and 
rootstock are compatible, that the scion has mature buds, and that the cambia of the scion and 
rootstock match. Be especially careful to prevent drying or contamination of grafting materials. 
TOOLS USED FOR BUDDING AND GRAFTING 
1. Dibber 
2. Budding and grafting knives- 
3. Grafting Tools 
4. Grafting Tape. 
5. Pruning and Lopping Shears 
DIBBER 
Dibbers are used to make holes in seed bed to plant seeds, seedlings and bulbs. They are 
ergonomically designed consisting of a stainless steel sharp dibber and a hard wood handle 
joined together using a ferrule. The sharp dibber glides effortlessly into all soils. Overall length 
27cm, weight 290g. 
 
GRAFTING AND BUDDING KNIVES 
Grafting and budding knives are designed specifically for these purposes and should not be 
used for carving and whittling wood. Using them for other purposes will make cutting edge 
blunt very quickly. . Grafting and budding knives must be kept razor sharp so they will cut 
smoothly. They are available in either left- or right-handed models. The blade is beveled on 
only one side, unlike conventional knives, which have blades that bevel on both sides down to 
the cutting edge 
 
 
Grafting knife 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
134 
 
Grafting knife 
  
 
 
Graftin
g blade  
  Graftin
g blade -
folding 
Budding knives         Budding knives 
 
GRAFTING TOOLS 
           Grafting tool is designed for making the cleft graft. It is used when the rootstock‟s 
diameter is greater than 1 inch. The wedge-shaped blade is used to split the stock, and the flat 
pick opens the cleft so that the scions can be inserted. Once in place, the flat pick is removed 
and the cleft comes together to hold the scions in position. 
 
 
 
Hand operated bench 
grafting tool- V shaped 
cut 
Hand operated bench 
grafting tool - Chip and 
bud graft 
Foot operated bench grafting tool- 
omega cut 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
135 
 
 
 
Saw type electrically powered grafting machine 
Omega type  electricity operated 
grafting machine 
  
Omega, V shaped and saw type machine cuts 
 
PRUNING AND LOPPING SHEARS 
           Pruning and lopping shears are the scissors or sliding blade type rather than the blade 
and anvil type. They are used to harvest scion wood or bud sticks, As with knives, pruning 
and lopping shears should be kept razor sharp to give clean, close cuts 
PRUNING SHEAR 
           Designed for those with smaller hands who may prefer a smaller, lighter pruner.  It is 
comfortable to use yet every bit is as sturdy and powerful as other tools. Ideal for small 
pruning work such as grape vines, shrubs and young trees The anvil blade is screw mounted.  
The short blades facilitate closer cutting to the stem of the plant. Recommended Cutting 
Capacity up to  2 cm, length 18 cm and weight 200 gm 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
136 
                             
          
  Pruning shear 
                                              
FOLDING PRUNING S AW 
           It cuts branches up to 4 inches in diameter. Overall length 35 cm and  blade length 15 
cm. The shape of the blade is thinner at the top and thicker at the bottom - where the teeth are. 
This unique feature keeps only the teeth in contact with the material to be cut. This prevents 
clogging and binding, since the sides of the blade never come in contact with the wood.  
 
Folding pruning saw 
GRAFTING TAPE    
Grafting tape is utilized as a cover/protecting bandage when using a splint for 
broken/cracked branches, twigs. It is also used to hold the soil and roots for the root over rock 
design of Bonsai styling. This product is 5/8" wide and 328 feet long, clear 
 
TRANSPLANTERS (FOR HORTICULTURAL CROPS) 
Need for transplanting 
1. There are practical reasons for transplanting plants and flowers a) to coop up with 
season b) to coop up with time of release of water c)  to raise healthy seedling in a 
controlled environment 
2. Moving homes 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
137 
3. Redesigning, Correcting, or Rearranging your garden 
4. Relocating to a better spot in your yard (more sun or shade) 
5. Avoiding roots from surrounding trees 
6. Transferring potted plants and flowers to the garden 
7. Alleviate crowding 
 
Potato Planter 
  
Relative difficu lty in transplan ting various vegetables 
Easy to transplant Medium difficulty Difficult to transplant 
Broccoli sprouts Cauliflower Watermelon 
Brussels Celery Muskmelon 
Cabbage Egg plant Squash 
Tomato Onion Cucumber 
Lettuce Pepper   
Tools needed for manual transplanting of horticultural crops 
1. Long bladed spade (sharp) 
2. Sharp loppers 
3. Small Trowel 
4. Rose pruners 
5. Bone Meal or other recommended fertilizer 
6. Leather gloves 
7. Wheelbarrow, wooden board, or plastic sheet to transport plant 
8. Water (two large buckets for each plant) 
9. Disinfecting sprays such as lime sulfur or fungicides 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
138 
NURSERY STOCK VEGETABLE TRANSPLANTERS  
The Mechanical Transplanters are excellent close spacing bed transplanters that work well in 
any soil condition. They can Plant at spacing as close as 5-8 cm in the row. Planters are 
available to plant 2-6 rows at a time with 15-20 cm row spacing. Float Wheel Direct Drive 
system provides positive plant spacing without wheel slippage Twin hydraulic cylinders with 
equalizer permit even lifting of the planting mechanisms during field operation and transport. 
Optional double disc shoe cuts trash left in the beds.  
 
Five row nursery stock vegetable transplanters    
           
 
                                   Four row nursery stock vegetable transplan ters 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
139 
    
Two row vegetable transplanter 
 
Two row nursery transplanter 
 
 
Two row nursery transplanter 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
140 
TREE PLANTING  
Tree planting is the process of transplanting tree seedlings generally for forestry, land 
reclamation, or landscaping purposes. A properly planted tree or shrub will be more tolerant 
of adverse conditions and require much less management than one planted incorrectly. 
Planting technique impacts water quality as it minimizes water, fertilizer and pesticide use. 
When making decisions on planting techniques, one should consider how the plant was grown 
in the nursery, the plant's drainage requirements, the soil type and drainage characteristics, 
and the availability of irrigation water. The plant should be specifically appropriate to the site, 
or the site should be amended to specifically fit the plant. 
Planting depth          
The most important consideration in planting trees and shrubs is the planting depth. Don't 
plant too deep. It is better to plant in a raised manner so the roots will not drown or suffocate. 
Dig planting holes 2 to 3 times wider than the root ball and the same depth. Locate the root 
ball on solid soil and not loose backfill. Wire baskets do not need to be completely removed 
from large field grown trees. Cut and fold down the top half of the basket, fold back the 
burlap, and remove nylon strings. Be sure to remove plastic liners or synthetic burlap type 
materials. 
 
TRACTOR OPERATED POST HOLE DIGGER 
Both mechanical and hydraulic drive post hole diggers are available to fit most landscaping , 
farming, or ranching applications. Auger drive mechanism may use either planetary drive or 
hydraulic drive. It consists of an auger, yoke tubing, gear box drive, power shaft, hitch frame 
etc. The digger is connected to tractor and moved to places where required. The drive to the 
gear box is obtained from PTO of the tractor. Holes of diameter 15 to 100 cm and depth 09 to 
100 cm can be made by using appropriate augers.   

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
141 
  
Tractor operated Post hole digger- gear 
drive 
Tractor operated Post hole digger- hydraulic 
drive 
 
ENGINE OPERATED POST HOLE DIGGER (MANUAL HANDLING)  
Two man auger is powered by a 4 cycle, 5 hp engine. The auger can make holes from 5 to 20 
cm in diameter and depth up to 75 cm There is an optional 45 cm extension available.  It is 
suitable for planting large shrubs, installing fences, building decks and digging mailbox holes. 
 
Engine operated post hole digger - manual handling 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
142 
HARVESTERS 
FRUIT HARVESTER- MANUAL TYPE 
 
 
 
     Using a fruit harvester is faster, easier and safer way to pick apples, oranges, peaches, 
plums and more from tree tops. Manually used fruit harvester consists of a PVC coated wire 
basket with finger like prongs that grasp the fruit. Padding is provided to the basket to protect 
fruit against bruising. The basket can be securely clamped to any length pole. The basket 
measures 31cm L x 15cm Diameter 
 
Manual Fruit Harvester 
 
CITRUS HARVESTER         
Two types of mechanical harvesters are being used today for harvesting citrus  
a) Continuous canopy shake system  
b) Trunk shake system. Shake and catch system 
Continuous canopy shake system is a self-propelled unit that shakes the tree canopy causing 
the fruit to fall from the tree and onto a catch frame. Trunk shake system simply shakes fruit to 
the ground, requiring the fruit to be picked up by a hand crew. 
COMMON FEATURES FOR BOTH TYPES OF HARVESTERS  
Whether self-propelled or tractor-drawn, the core unit of a continuous canopy mechanical 
harvesting unit consists of a series of whirls stacked horizontally. Each whirl consists of a 
series of approximately 6-foot-long, 1.5- to 2-inch-diameter rods mounted to the whirls, which 
are connected to a central drum. The rods are generally referred to as tines. The tines penetrate 
into the tree canopy, shaking the canopy horizontally to remove fruit. 
The shake frequency of the tines can vary depending on the force needed to remove the fruit. 
On the OXBO MODEL, the operator of the shaker assembly can adjust the angle of the tine 
penetration to the angle of a hedged tree. The drum is mounted to the controlling unit so that 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
143 
the interaction of the harvesting tines with the canopy begins at 3 feet from the soil surface. 
The drum, which contains the whirls, can be elevated up to 18 feet above the soil surface. 
During one pass, the drum can harvest up to 18 feet of canopy height. Hedged trees insure 
uniformity of tree shape and allow for maximum tine penetration into the tree canopy, thereby 
increasing fruit removal. To minimize fruit splitting from impact with the ground or catch 
frame, trees should be topped to a maximum of 16 to 18 feet. 
CONTINUOUS CANOPY SHAKE SYSTEM 
 
 
 
Citrus harvester- self-
propelled system 
(Oxbo make) 
Citrus harvester -self-
propelled system  
(Korvan make) 
Citrus harvester Tractor-drawn 
canopy shaker 
(Oxbo make) 
 
Citrus harvester Tractor-drawn canopy shaker 
 
SELF-PROPELLED HARVESTING UNITS- CITRUS HARVESTER 
Self-propelled harvesting units work in pairs, one unit for each side of the tree. Each unit has 
leveling hydraulics, which allows it to work effectively in bedded groves. The paired units 
travel down the tree row at ground speeds that can vary from 0.5 to 1.3 miles per hour, thus 
allowing 200 to 400 trees per hour to be harvested. Each unit catches and separates the fruit 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
144 
from leaves and stems, reducing the amount of trash delivered to the processing plant. Fruit 
can be conveyed directly to a goat-type truck, or up to 60 boxes can be temporarily stored on 
the OXBO harvester's deck to allow for continuous operation. The goat-type trucks are similar 
to a conventional harvesting goat but slightly larger with a capacity of between 130 and 150 
boxes. These units transport the fruit to semi trailers, which deliver the fruit to the processing 
plants. 
For maximum efficiency, the self-propelled shake and catch units are best suited for groves 
with uniform tree canopy size. Canopy uniformity can be facilitated by hedging and topping. 
Trunk alignment in the row, clear trunk height of 18 inches to the first branches, and long tree 
row length improve harvesting efficiency. Skirting height of 30 inches above the ground 
allows for the catch frame to easily travel under the tree canopy, minimizing lower limb 
damage and maximizing fruit recovery. Tree topping height should not exceed 16 to 18 feet 
and trees should have a canopy width from the tree trunk to the outer canopy of 6.5 to 8 feet. 
Some hand labor may be required to glean any fruit remaining in the tree or to retrieve fallen 
fruit that missed the catch frame. Under grove conditions outlined above, continuous shake 
and catch systems typically deliver 90 to 95% of the available fruit to the semi trailer. With 
gleaning crews, total fruit recovery approaches 98%. In cases where fruit prices are low, hand 
labor to glean fruit may not be economical. 
A self-propelled continuous canopy shake and catch system uses a crew of six workers - 2 
harvester operators and 4 goat drivers. Overall, harvest labor productivity improves from 5 to 
10 times over a hand crew, depending on grove conditions and equipment downtime. 
For groves that lack tree size uniformity and have not been skirted, the tractor-drawn 
continuous canopy shaker provides an option with greater flexibility for the adoption of 
mechanical harvesting systems. This tractor-drawn system works in a similar fashion to the 
canopy shake and catch units but without the catch frame. Tines mounted in the whirl remove 
the fruit from the tree by a horizontal shaking action, allowing the fruit to fall to the ground. 
As with the self-propelled unit, the operator can adjust the tilt and elevation of the drum that 
contains the series of stacked whirls. Harvesting area is limited to the height of 18 feet. With an 
experienced operator and in trees less than 18 feet in height, 95% of the crop can be removed 
from the tree. 
THE TRACTOR-DRAWN CANOPY SHAKE SYSTEM- CITRUS HARVESTER 
The tractor-drawn canopy shake system must work in conjunction with a hand crew to gather 
fruit shaken off by the harvesting unit. The harvester can travel between one-half and one mile 
per hour and have the capacity to harvest between 100 and 200 trees per hour. The efficiency 
of this harvester is influenced by the size of the pickup crew. Typically, a harvester shakes only 
the number of trees that will provide the fruit that can be picked up within a day. 
The pick up crew gathers fruit into 8- or 10-box tubs, which are then loaded into conventional 
high lift trucks or goats. Since hand crews glean most of the remaining tree fruit, the tractor-
drawn canopy shaker system in conjunction with hand labor delivers up to 99% of the 
available crop. When the tractor-drawn canopy shaker is used, labor harvest efficiencies as 
compared to standard hand harvesting are improved by at least twofold. 
As with the shake and catch systems, trees should be hedged with a canopy width from the 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
145 
trunk of the tree to the outer skirt of no more than 8 feet. Trees should be topped to a height of 
no more than 18 feet. Multi-stemmed tree trunks or low hanging branches do not decrease 
harvesting efficiency as significantly as they do when the catch frame systems are utilized. 
Harvesting and roadside costs in the 2003-04 season for continuous canopy shake systems can 
range from $1.00 to $1.75 per weight box. The lower cost range reflects well-prepared, high-
yielding trees that are harvested with a catch frame, and does not include the cost of a gleaning 
crew to collect non-harvested fruit. The cost per box of the tractor-drawn system typically is 
higher due to the additional labor requirements to gather the fruit from the ground. Actual 
harvesting costs will depend on specific grove conditions and gleaning requirements of the 
grower. 
Higher-yielding blocks should enjoy a lower per-box cost of mechanical harvesting. Larger 
blocks or tracts in close proximity should command a lower price, since the harvesting 
equipment can work more efficiently for a longer sustained period of time. Whatever the price 
of a mechanical system, the relative comparison a grower needs to consider is the price a hand 
crew would charge to pick and roadside the same volume of fruit. 
For the Florida citrus grower to remain competitive in a global environment, all options that 
reduce the harvesting costs must be considered. Mechanical harvesting for processed citrus 
fruit is a viable option to lower harvesting cost. Ongoing research conducted by the Florida 
Department of Citrus, the University of Florida, and private companies show that the above 
systems can reduce harvesting costs by 20 to 40 cents per box. Additionally, studies that have 
been conducted for multiple years have shown no adverse effects in tree health, productivity, 
or tree longevity where these systems have been used. 
TRACTOR OPERATED TURMERIC HARVESTER 
The unit consists of a blade with five bar points for easy penetration into the soil, a main frame 
and a hitch frame.. The blade is fixed at an inclination of 20° to a cultivator frame with straight 
tynes at both ends for easy penetration in to the soil. It can be hitched to the tractor at the hitch 
frame. For digging of turmeric, the blade with bar points penetrate into the soil, lift the 
turmeric rhizomes along with the soil and convey them to the lift rods which aids in 
separation of the rhizomes from the soil. The soil slip back to the ground and the dug out 
rhizomes deposited at the centre of the unit. The field capacity of the unit is 1.6 ha per day.  
The salient features of the unit are: 
 Results in 70 per cent saving in cost and 90 per cent in time when compared to manual 
digging.  
 Extent of damage caused to the rhizomes is very much less (2.83 per cent)  
 The un dug rhizomes left in the field is minimum (2.42 percent)  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
146 
  
Turmeric harvester 
POWER TILLER OPERATED POTATO DIGGER  
Potato is being grown in the hilly regions. For harvesting potatoes, mechanization or improved 
implement has to be introduced to complete the harvest economically and in time. Because of 
ease of maneuverability of power tiller in hilly tracts, a potato digger attachment to power 
tiller is developed. The unit consists of a shank, a triangular shape ridger with a share and 
extension rods and a hitch frame. The share penetrates into the soil  and the ridger bottom  dig 
out potato along with the soil. When the harvested mass moves over the extension rods, the 
soil slips back to the ground and the partly cleaned potatoes deposit on the soil. The depth can 
be adjusted to set the depth up to 30 cm. The field capacity is 0.4 ha/day. 
The salient features of the unit are: 
 Digging with power tiller drawn potato digger results in 47.7 per cent of saving in cost 
and 68.0 per cent of saving in time when compared to manual digging 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
147 
 
 
 
 Lecture 14  
EQUIPMENT FOR LAND DEVELOPMENT AND SOIL CONSERVATION - 
DOZERS, LEVELERS, CHISEL PLOUGH, SUB SOIL PLOUGH, BLADE 
HARROW, BUND FORMER LAND LEVELING 
 
Ill effects of uneven land  
1. The unevenness in land level is sometimes called surface topography. Within a field 
unevenness has a major effect on crop management and crop yields. 
 2. Unevenness in land level results in uneven water coverage. (Uneven water coverage means 
that more water is needed to wet up the soil for land preparation) 
 3. Unevenness in land level results in uneven crop stands, increased weeds and uneven 
maturing crops. (All of these factors result in reduced yields and reduced grain quality). 
 Benefits of Land leveling 
1. Effective land leveling reduces the work in crop establishment and care, and increases 
yields.  
2. Level land improves water coverage that reduces the amount of water required for land 
preparation, improves crop establishment and care 
3. Decreases the time to complete field tasks 
4. Reduces weed problems 
5. Results in uniform crop maturity 
Principles of land leveling 
            Leveling of land requires soil to be shifted from the high points of the field to the low 
points in the most cost-effective way. 
PROCEDURE IN LAND LEVELING 
 plough the field twice 
 Measure the levelness of the field by conducting a topographic survey. 
 draw a topographic map of the field 
 mark the high and low areas in the field 
 move soil from the high areas to the low areas in the most cost-effective manner 
  repair levees 
a) Plough the field 
Plough from the center of the field outward in lands. If the field is wide it may be more 
efficient to plough a number of lands and cut out furrows in each field. Finish with a cut out 
furrow around the edge of the field beside the bund.  This will help keep the bunds in good 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
148 
shape, reduce the bund area and also act as drainage lines for the field most fields will need to 
be ploughed twice before leveling can commence 
b) Mark the high and low spots in the field  
Using either standing water in the field or height measurements from a topographic survey, 
mark the high and low areas in the field and form a strategy to most efficiently and effectively 
move soil from the high to low spots. 
(Note: It is difficult to move soil more than 50 meters. If the soil has to be dragged more than 
50 meters it may pay to first move soil from the middle of the field to the lowest places and 
then from the higher places to the middle of the field.) 
c) Begin leveling  
Position the leveling device in the high part of the field and drag soil to the lower part of the 
field. 
(Note. If the fields are ploughed in lands and the same leveling procedure is adopted in the 
second year the field should end up relatively smooth and level.) 
d) Maintain or repair levee (bunds) 
 Repair the levees either by first ploughing soil up against the levee or manually using a hoe or 
shovel. This is best done after leveling. Bulldozers can level fields.  Levees can be manually 
repaired  
(Note. Levees need to be maintained as any advantage of improved water management 
through leveling will be lost if water is able to escape through or over the levees.) 
LAND LEVELING USING DRAFT ANIMALS 
To level a field using a draft animal and a leveling board the following equipment are needed: 
1. Animal or pair of animals (oxen, caribou) 
2. Plough (moldboard) 
3. Harrows or leveling board 
4. Water source and Water pump (if fields are not flooded) 
With water in the field, mark or note the high and low areas and form a strategy to most 
effectively move soil from the high to low spots. Weight will need to be added on to the 
harrow to move the soil. A ratio of 40kg weight/meter width of leveling board gives the best 
results. 
LAND LEVELING USING A 4-WHEEL TRACTOR AND BACK BLADE  
To level a field using a 4-wheel tractor and a back blade the following additional equipment 
are needed: 
1. Plough (disc, moldboard or tine) 
2. harrows (disc or tine) 
3. Tractor blade or drag bucket 
4. Surveying equipment 
A field diagram should be drawn noting the level of cut and fill required in the field. With 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
149 
water in the field, mark or note the high and low areas and form a strategy to most effectively 
move soil from the high to low spots. Tractor hydraulic system will be used to lower or lift the 
leveling blade. 
LEVELING A LAND FOR A SMALL LAWN  
1. Initial preparation of land for a lawn  
Making a level lawn area is simple although does require some physical effort for the initial 
digging. Once the area has been dug over, the rest of the procedure is straightforward and 
easy. 
It is wise to wait several weeks before seeding a newly graded area, especially if a lot of filling 
has been done, because the soil will settle and may form hollows. Any hollows that form must 
be filled and allowed to settle again or tramped down to ensure that the area is fairly level. To 
hasten the soil settling, give it a thorough and deep soaking with water. 
2. Preparing Area for lawn  
Mark out the area where you wish to plant a lawn with brightly colored paint in a spray can. 
Dig over the soil within that area to loosen it. Hammer flat-topped square-headed wooden 
stakes at each corner of the area and 10 to 15 cm apart in the ground in each direction. Level 
the stakes with a carpenter's level placed on a board which is long enough to reach three 
stakes. Each stake should protrude from the ground by 7.5 cm to 10 cm Adjust the stakes as 
necessary to ensure that they are all level. Always work with the board over three stakes; left 
to right, right to left or diagonally. Do this until all the stakes have been made level. Add some 
rich soil to top dress that already in place after all stakes have been adjusted. This topsoil 
should be uniformly level with the tops of all stakes. Fertilize the area according to the seed 
producer‟s instructions. Scratch the surface area with a bamboo rake or a light lawn broom 
and your lawn area is ready to seed. 
 
3. Seeding a lawn  
Lay out a grid in the area to be seeded with strings stretched between tent pegs at the sides 
and the ends to form rectangles not more than 10' across. Place one or more planks on which to 
stand while sowing so as to avoid walking on the ground. Sow across each rectangle from side 
to side as an individual unit. Repeat the sowing from end to end. Rake the seed lightly into the 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
150 
surface with a bamboo rake or a lawn broom. Roll or lightly tramp down the whole area to 
firm the seed in the soil. Keep the area well watered. 
 
MACHINERY USED FOR LAND LEVELING 
1. Leveler -    tractor, power tiller and bullock drawn types are available. Heavy  
duty machinery. Meant for initial cutting and filling of land  
undulations 
2. Precision land leveler- to provide desired grade either level or gently sloping. 
8, 10, 12 13, 15 and 15 feet width of cut, 8 to 18 yards .Tractor HP  
120 meant for farm use.  
3. Leveler with ripper attachment - rippers loosen the soil prier to moving the soil. 
4. Scrapers - tracto r drawn animal drawn types available for smooth leveling.  
Used after Initial leveling is completed using a leveler. 
5. Scrap plane - to create table top finish 
6. Drag scrapers - Precision finish and final touch up. Suitable for small areas 
Weight boxes are used to add weight to increase depth of cut. 
7.  Box scraper -   Box scrapers are used to smooth and level the ground. Rear  
Wheel makes he unit a mini land-plane. Skid shoes control depth of cut. Hitching adjustment 
for more or less cutting force to suit job. 
LAND LEVELER- TRACTOR DRAWN 
            Land Leveler is used for leveling the land, filling the field depressions, back fillings the 
pits, farmyard clearing etc. It is also called as blade terracer. It consists of a leveling board, 
wings for soil retaining, angle adjusting screw and three point hitch frame. Soil retaining 
wings are fitted on both ends of the blade for carrying the soil without spillage. It is suitable 
for sticky and non-sticky soils as well. Levelers are available for tractors, power tillers and 
bullocks. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
151 
 
Tractor drawn land leveler 
 
 
 
 
 
 Precision laser land levelers 
for farm use 
Scraper for dirt movemen t- 
with out laser control 
  
  
 
A ripper attachment loosens the ground in the outer area so that field will settle uniformly 
and settle evenly 
Scrap plane designed for use width lasers. It creates a smooth table top finish that no other 
machine can do. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
152 
 
Drag scrapers are used width laser control for precision finish, touch up and limited land 
leveling. They work well for short haul dirt moving and for smoothing.. Weight boxes are 
used to add weight for increased cutting. 
  
Box scraper 
CHISEL PLOUGH 
The chisel plough is a common tool to get deep tillage (prepared land) with limited soil 
disruption. The main function of this plough is to loosen and aerate the soils while leaving 
crop residue at the top of the soil. This plough can be used to reduce the effects of compaction 
and to help break up plough pan and hardpan. Unlike many other ploughs the chisel will not 
invert or turn the soil. This characteristic has made it a useful addition to no-till and low-till 
farming practices which attempt to maximise the erosion-prevention benefits of keeping 
organic matter and farming residues present on the soil surface through the year. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
153 
  
A modern John Deere 8110 Farm Tractor using a chisel plough. 
 
The chisel plough is typically set to run up to a depth of 300 to 400 mm. However some 
models may run much deeper. Each of the individual ploughs, or shanks, are typically set 
from 230 mm to 305 mm apart. Such a plough can encounter significant soil drag, 
consequently a tractor of sufficient power and good traction is required. When planning to 
plough with a chisel plough it is important to bear in mind that 10 to 15 horsepower (7 to 
11 kW) per shank will be required. 
 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
154 
 
 
Lecture 15 
COST OF OPERATION OF FARM MACHINERY – PROBLEM SOLVING 
 
Under cost analysis the cost incurred per hour of operation of a tool/ implement/ machine is 
calculated. This will give an idea of the payback period of the investment. This cost serves as 
the basis to fix up hire charges of the implement for custom hiring 
            Total cost of operation of an implement/ tool involves two costs namely 1. Fixed cost 2. 
Variable cost or operating cost. 
 Fixed cost – This cost relates to machine ownership. This cost can occur regardless of whether 
the machine is used or not. Fixed cost is inversely proportional to the annual use. It includes 
depreciation, interest on investment, taxes, insurance and housing costs. 
Variable cost or operating cost – Those costs which are directly related to the amount of use 
are called variable costs. These costs are incurred only when the machine is used. Variable 
costs include repair and maintenance, fuel and lubricants, servicing and labour charges.  
Calculation of fixed cost 
1. Depreciation - It is the reduction in value of the machine with the passage of time. In 
the usual situation with field machines being operated only a few days in a year year, 
obsolescence is the most important factor affecting the depreciation (Obsolescence is 
the state of being which occurs when a person, object, or service is no longer wanted 
even though it may still be in good working order). A machine may become obsolete 
because of the development of improved models, changes in farm practices etc. 
2. The following expression based on the straight line method is used to calculate the 
depreciation 
                  D         =          ﴾ (C   -  S    ﴿   / L  ﴿     x   H 
Where 
D         =          Depreciation cost,   Rs/hr 
C         =          Initial cost of the machine,  Rs 
S          =          Salvage value of the machine, usually taken as 10 
per cent of the initial investment of the machine Rs,                     
L          =          Expected life period of the machine, years 
H         =          Number of working hours per year 
Note: Salvage value is the estimated value of an asset at the end of its useful life. 
ii. Interest on investment- Interest on investment in a farm machine is a legitimate cost, since 
money spent in buying a machine cannot be used for other productive enterprises. Annual 
charges of interest should be calculated on the basis of the actual rate of interest payable. The 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
155 
rate of interest should reflect the prevailing rates (14%).   The interest on investment is 
calculated by using formula given below.           
    I           =          (A x   i) / (100 x H) Where, 
I           =          Interest on investment, Rs/hr 
A          =          Average purchase price, Rs. 
H         =          Number of working hours per year 
i           =          Rate of interest ( usually it is assumed as 14 % ) 
The average purchase price shall be calculated by the following expression.                    A          
=          (C + S)/2 
Where, 
A       =        Average purchase price, Rs 
C         =          Initial cost of the machine, Rs. 
S          =          Salvage value of the machine, usually taken as 10 percent of the 
initial investment of the machine,  Rs. 
iii.       Taxes, Insurance and housing -. Sales tax and road tax can be distributed over 
the life of the machine. Farm machinery is sometimes insured against loss by theft or damage.  
Actual amount paid or to be paid annually for insurance and annual taxes if any should be 
charged. If the information is not available it may be calculated on the basis of 2 per cent of the 
average purchase price per annum. The charge for housing is taken as 1 per cent of the average 
purchase price of the machine. 
 So the charges for taxes, insurance and housing can be taken as 3 % per year of the average 
cost of the machine. 
T, I and H        =          3 x A/(100 x H) 
Where, 
T, I and H        =          Taxes, insurance and housing charges, Rs/hr. 
A          =          Average purchase price, Rs. 
H         =          Number of working hours per year 
The total fixed cost is the sum of depreciation (D), interest on investment (I) and Taxes, 
Insurance and housing (T, I and H) charges. 
2.        Variable cost 
i.         Repair and maintenance cost - Repair and maintenance costs are necessary to keep a 
machine in perfect working condition due to wear, part failure, renewal of tyre and tube and 
accidents. The repair and maintenance costs shall be calculated as 10 per cen t of the initial 
cost of the machine per year. 
R & M  =          10 x C/(100 X H)   
Where, 
R&M   =          Repair and maintenance costs, Rs/hr  
C         =          Initial cost of the machine, Rs. 
H         =          Number of working hours per year 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
156 
ii.         Fuel cost – Fuel consumption depends on the size of the power unit.  
The cost of actual fuel consumption    can be used in calculations 
 
Fuel cost  F     = Quantity of fuel consumed per hour (Lit per hour)  
(Rs/hr)                         x Cost of fuel (Rs/lit) 
iii.        Lubricating oil cost - Cost of lubricating oil can be taken as 30 % of fuel cost 
Oil cost = 30 / 100 x Quantity of fuel consumed per hour (Rs/hr)                                            (Lit 
per hour) x Cost of fuel (Rs/lit) 
iv.        Operator cost - In performing custom work, the actual number of operators engaged 
for carrying out the operation should be used for calculation of operator charges. The 
prevailing rate of wages has to be adopted for calculation. 
Operator cost (Rs/hr) = (Number of persons engaged x wages per  Day)/ 8 
The total variable cost is the sum of repair and maintenance cost (R &M), fuel cost, oil cost 
and operator charges. 
Total cost of operation of the = Total fixed cost + Total machine per unit time,  
Total cost of operation of the =Total cost of operation of the machine per unit area, Rs/ha 
machine per unit time, (Rs/hr)/ field capacity of the machine ( ha /hr). 
Class work  
Problem : The initial cost of 35 hp Massy Ferguson Tractor owned by a farmer is  Rs. 
3,00,000/-. The tractor is expected to work for 10 years. In a year the farmer uses the tractor for 
1000 hours. The farmer also owns a 11 tined cultivator. The tynes are spaced at 20 cm apart. 
The cost of the cultivator is Rs.12,000/-. The tractor consumes 3 liters of diesel while ploughing 
with the cultivator. The life of the cultivator is 10 years. The farmer uses the cultivator for 400 
hours in a year.  The cultivator is operated at a speed of 4 km/h. Calculate the cost of 
ploughing 2 ha of land with the cultivator. Assume all other necessary data. 
Calculation 
Cost of operation for tractor 
1. Depreciation 
D         =          ﴾ (C   -  S   ﴿     / L﴿        x   H      Where 
D         =          Depreciation cost, Rs/hr 
C         =          Rs 3,00,000 
S          =          10 % of C 
L          =          10 years 
H         =          1000 hours per year 
D         = (3,00,000   -  10/100 (3,00,000 ﴿     / 10 x     1000﴿   
= Rs. 27 / hour 
2. Interest I            
Average cost A 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
157 
A          =          (3,00,000 + 30,000)/2 =       Rs. 1,65,000 
I           =          (1,65,000 x   14) / (100 x 1000) 
Rs. 23.1           
3. Taxes, Insurance and housing 
T, In and H            =          3 x 1,65,000/(100 x 1000) 
=       Rs. 4.95 
Total fixed cost = 27 + 23.1 + 4.95 
=  Rs. 55.05 / h 
Variable cost 
1. Repair and maintenance 
R & M                    =          10 x 3,00,000/(100 X 1000)  
=        Rs. 30/h 
2. Fuel cost F       =          3.0 lit/h x Rs 45/lit 
                              =          Rs. 135/lit 
3. Lubricating oil cost    = (3 0/100 ) x Rs. 135/lit 
=  Rs. 40.5 / h 
4.Operator cost (Rs/hr) = ( 1 person x Rs.240/day )/ 8 
= Rs. 30 / h  
Total variable cost    = 30 +135 + 40.5 + 30  
= Rs. 235 / h 
Cost of operation for tractor 
Total fixed cost + Total variable cost 
Rs. 55.05 + Rs. 235 = Rs. 290.05 / h 
Cost of operation for implement 
1. Depreciation 
D         =          ﴾ (C   -  S   ﴿     / L﴿        x   H Where 
D         =          Depreciation cost, Rs/hr 
C         =          Rs 12,000 
S          =          10 % of C 
L          =          10 years 
H         =          400 hours per year 
D         =          ﴾ (12,000 -  10/100 (12,000 ﴿ / 10 x     400﴿   
=           Rs. 2 .7 / hour 
2. Interest  I           
Average cost A 
A          =          (12,000 + 1,200)/2 
=       Rs. 6,600 
I           =          (6,600 x   14) / (100 x 400) 
Rs. 2.31/h         
3. Taxes, Insurance and housing  
T, In and H =         3 x 6,600/(100 x 400) 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
158 
=       Rs. 0.495 /h 
Total fixed cost = 2 .7 + 2.31 + 0.495  
=  Rs.5.51 / h 
Variable cost 
1. Repair and maintenance 
R & M                    =          10 x 12,000/(100 X 400)  
=        Rs. 3 / h 
Lubricating oil cost    =  Nil 
Operator cost (Rs/hr) =  Nil 
Total variable cost =  Rs. 3 / h  
Cost of operation for implement 
Total fixed cost + Total variable cost 
Rs.5.51 + Rs.3 =  Rs. 8.51 
Cost of operation for tractor and implement 
Rs. 290.05 / h + Rs. 8.51/h = Rs. 298.55/h 
Field capacity of implement 
FC =S W/10 ha/h 
= (2.2 x 4.0) / 10 = 0.88 ha/h 
Time required to complete 1.0 ha land 
= 1/ field capacity 
= 1/ 0.88   
= 1.136 hour/ha 
Cost of ploughing 1.0 ha land = No. of hours / ha x  
cost of ploughing Rs./ ha 
= 1.136 x Rs. 298.55  
                  = Rs. 339.16/ha 
Average Field Speeds, Field Efficiencies, and Effective Field Capacities 0f some farm 
machinery: 
Machine Size Speed 
(mph) 
Field 
Efficiency (%) 
Effective Field 
Capacity (A/h) 
Fertilizer Spreader 40' 6 70 20.4 
  50' 6 70 25.5 
Manure Spreader 10' 5 63 3.8 
Anhydrous Ammonia 
Applicator 
9 
knife 
5 65 8.9 
Plow 7–16" 5 85 4.8 
Subsoiler 5–24" 5 85 5.2 
Chisel Plow 11‟3" 5.5 85 6.4 
Offset Disk 12' 5.5 85 6.8 
Tandem Disk 14' 6 83 8.5 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
159 
Field Cultivator/Seedbed 
Conditioner 
15' 7 85 10.8 
Planter, seed only 6–30" 5 65 5.9 
Grain or Soybean Drill 10' 6 70 5.1 
Broadcast Seeder 20' 5 70 8.5 
Sprayer 20' 6 65 9.5 
Rotary Hoe         
Row-crop Cultivator 6–30" 4 80 5.8 
Mower Conditioner  
rotary 
9' 7 83 6.3 
cutterbar 12' 5 80 5.8 
Combine, soybeans* 15' 3.8 73 5.0 
self-propelled Forage 
Harvester 3 rows 
      25 
 
Problems 
1. Calculate the cost of seeding one hectare of land with bullock drawn seed drill of size 5 x 22 
cm. the speed of bullocks is 3 km/h. Hire charges of bullocks is Rs. 150/day.. Hire charges of 
seed drill is Rs. 100/day of 8 hours. 
2. A flutted feed seed drill has 8 furrow openers of single disc type. The furrow openers are 
spaced 25 cm apart and the main drive wheel has a diameter of 120 cm. How many turns of 
main drive wheel would occur when the seed drill has covered 1.0 ha of land. 
 
 
 
 
 
******☺****** 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
160 
 
 
 
Lecture 16 
TRACTOR AND IMPLEMENT SELECTION FOR DIFFERENT 
AGRICULTURAL OPERATIONS 
 
Putting together an ideal machinery system is not easy. Equipment that works best one year 
may not work well the next because of changes in weather conditions or crop production 
practices. Improvements in design may make older equipment obsolete. And, the number of 
acres being farmed or the amount of labor available may change. Because many of these 
variables are unpredictable, the goal of the good machinery manager should be to have a 
system that is flexible enough to adapt to a range of weather and crop conditions while 
minimizing long-run costs and production risks. 
POINTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN SELECTING FARM MACHINERY 
            To do better farm machinery selection, the following fundamental things must be 
understood 
1. Machine Performance 
Each piece of machinery must perform reliably under a variety of field conditions or it is a 
poor investment regardless of its cost. Tillage implements should prepare a satisfactory 
seedbed while conserving moisture, destroying early weed growth and minimizing erosion 
potential. Planters and seeders 
should provide consistent seed placement and population as well as properly apply pesticides 
and fertilizers. Harvesting equipment must harvest clean, undamaged grain while minimizing 
field losses. The performance of a machine often depends on the skill of the operator, or on 
weather and soil conditions. Nevertheless, differences among machines can be evaluated 
through field trials, research reports and personal experience. 
2. Machinery Costs 
Once a particular type of tillage, planting, weed control, or harvesting machine has been 
selected, the question of how to minimize machinery costs must be answered. Machinery that 
is too large for a particular farming situation will cause machinery ownership costs to be 
unnecessarily high over the long run; machinery that is too small may result in lower crop 
yields or reduced quality. 
3. Ownership Costs 
Machinery ownership costs include charges for deprecation, interest on investment, property 
taxes, insurance and machinery housing. These costs increase in direct proportion to 
machinery investment and size. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
161 
4. Operating Costs 
Operating costs include fuel, lubricants and repairs. Operating costs per acre change very little 
as machinery size is increased or decreased. Using larger machinery consumes more fuel and 
lubricants per hour, but this is essentially 
offset by the fact that more acres are covered per hour. Much the same is true of repair costs. 
Thus, operating costs are of minor importance when deciding what size machinery is best 
suited to a certain farming operation 
5. Labor Cost 
As machinery capacity increases, the number of hours required to complete field operations 
over a given area naturally declines.  
6.Estimating the Field Capacity of Farm Machines  
If hourly or part-time hired labor operates machinery, it is appropriate to use the wage rate 
paid, plus the cost of any other benefits which may be provided, as the labor cost. If the 
farmer-owner or a hired worker who is paid a fixed wage operates machinery, then it is proper 
to value labor at its opportunity cost, or the estimated return it could earn if it were used 
elsewhere in the farm business, such as in livestock enterprises. 
7. Timeliness Costs 
In many cases, crop yields and quality are affected by the dates of planting and harvesting. 
This represents a “hidden” cost associated with farm machinery, but an important one 
nevertheless. The value of these yield losses is commonly referred to as “timeliness costs.”  
8. Total Machinery Costs 
Illustrates the effect that changes in machinery size have on each type of cost in a typical 
situation. For very small machinery (relative to crop acres), a slight increase in machinery size 
can lower timeliness and labor costs significantly, enough to more than offset the higher fixed 
costs. However, as machinery size continues to increase, the timeliness cost savings diminish, 
and eventually total costs begin to rise. One objective of machinery selection, then, is to select 
machinery in the size range where total machinery costs are lowest. 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
162 
 
Fig1. Effect of increasing machinery size on machinery costs. 
FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE SIZE OF MACHINERY NEEDED 
Machinery recommendations must be based on the characteristics of each individual farm. The 
following factors influence machinery selection, and are discussed in order of importance. 
1. Number of Crop Acres 
As more crop acres are farmed, larger-scale machinery is needed to ensure that planting and 
harvesting are completed in a timely fashion. An alternative is to acquire a second unit of some 
machines, if an additional tractor and operator are available. 
2. Labor Supply 
The number of acres that can be completed each day is the most critical measure of machinery 
capacity, more than machine width or acres completed per hour. Increasing the labor supply 
by hiring extra operators or by working longer hours during critical periods may be a 
relatively inexpensive way of stretching machinery capacity. In addition, the cost of additional 
labor only needs to be incurred in those years in which it is actually used, while the cost of 
investing in larger machinery becomes “locked in” as soon as the investment is made. On the 
other hand, extra labor may not always be available when needed, and working long hours 
over several days can present a safety hazard. 
3. Tillage Practices 
The number of field days needed before planting is completed depends partly on the number 
of separate operations completed on each acre. Reducing the number of tillage practices 
performed or performing more than one practice in the same trip effectively decreases the 
amount of machinery capacity needed to complete field operations on time. Of course, 
machinery cost savings from reduced tillage must be compared to possible increased chemical 
costs and effects on yields. 
Putting together an ideal machinery system is not easy. Equipment that works best one year 
may not work well the next because of changes in weather conditions or crop production 
practices. Improvements in design may make older equipment obsolete. And, the number of 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
163 
acres being farmed or the amount of labor available may change. Because many of these 
variables are unpredictable, the goal of the good machinery manager should be to have a 
system that is flexible enough to adapt to a range of weather and crop conditions while 
minimizing long-run costs and production risks 
POINTS TO BE CONSIDERED IN SELECTING A FARM MACHINERY 
            To do better farm machinery selection, the following fundamental things must be 
understood 
1. Machine Performance 
Each piece of machinery must perform reliably under a variety of field conditions or it is a 
poor investment regardless of its cost. Tillage implements should prepare a satisfactory 
seedbed while conserving moisture, destroying early weed growth and minimizing erosion 
potential. Planters and seeders 
should provide consistent seed placement and population as well as properly apply pesticides 
and fertilizers. Harvesting equipment must harvest clean, undamaged grain while minimizing 
field losses. The performance of a machine often depends on the skill of the operator, or on 
weather and soil conditions. Nevertheless, differences among machines can be evaluated 
through field trials, research reports and personal experience. 
2. Machinery Costs 
Once a particular type of tillage, planting, weed control, or harvesting machine has been 
selected, the question of how to minimize machinery costs must be answered. Machinery that 
is too large for a particular farming situation will cause machinery ownership costs to be 
unnecessarily high over the long run; machinery that is too small may result in lower crop 
yields or reduced quality. 
3. Ownership Costs 
Machinery ownership costs include charges for deprecation, interest on investment, property 
taxes, insurance and machinery housing. These costs increase in direct proportion to 
machinery investment and size. 
4. Operating Costs 
Operating costs include fuel, lubricants and repairs. Operating costs per acre change very little 
as machinery size is increased or decreased. Using larger machinery consumes more fuel and 
lubricants per hour, but this is essentially 
offset by the fact that more acres are covered per hour. Much the same is true of repair costs. 
Thus, operating costs are of minor importance when deciding what size machinery is best 
suited to a certain farming operation 
5. Labor Cost 
As machinery capacity increases, the number of hours required to complete field operations 
over a given area naturally declines.  

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
164 
6.Estimating the Field Capacity of Farm Machines  
If hourly or part-time hired labor operates machinery, it is appropriate to use the wage rate 
paid, plus the cost of any other benefits which may be provided, as the labor cost. If the 
farmer-owner or a hired worker who is paid a fixed wage operates machinery, then it is proper 
to value labor at its opportunity cost, or the estimated return it could earn if it were used 
elsewhere in the farm business, such as in livestock enterprises. 
7. Timeliness Costs 
In many cases, crop yields and quality are affected by the dates of planting and harvesting. 
This represents a “hidden” cost associated with farm machinery, but an important one 
nevertheless. The value of these yield losses is commonly referred to as “timeliness costs.”  
8. Total Machinery Costs 
Illustrates the effect that changes in machinery size have on each type of cost in a typical 
situation. For very small machinery (relative to crop acres), a slight increase in machinery size 
can lower timeliness and labor costs significantly, enough to more than offset the higher fixed 
costs. However, as machinery size continues to increase, the timeliness cost savings diminish, 
and eventually total costs begin to rise. One objective of machinery selection, then, is to select 
machinery in the size range where total machinery costs are lowest. 
 
Fig1. Effect of increasing machinery size on  machinery costs. 
FACTORS THAT AFFECT THE SIZE OF MACHINERY NEEDED 
Machinery recommendations must be based on the characteristics of each individual farm. The 
following factors influence machinery selection, and are discussed in order of importance. 
1. Number of Crop Acres 
As more crop acres are farmed, larger-scale machinery is needed to ensure that planting and 
harvesting are completed in a timely fashion. An alternative is to acquire a second unit of some 
machines, if an additional tractor and operator are available. 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
165 
2. Labor Supply 
The number of acres that can be completed each day is the most critical measure of machinery 
capacity, more than machine width or acres completed per hour. Increasing the labor supply 
by hiring extra operators or by working longer hours during critical periods may be a 
relatively inexpensive way of stretching machinery capacity. In addition, the cost of additional 
labor only needs to be incurred in those years in which it is actually used, while the cost of 
investing in larger machinery becomes “locked in” as soon as the investment is made. On the 
other hand, extra labor may not always be available when needed, and working long hours 
over several days can present a safety hazard. 
3. Tillage Practices 
The number of field days needed before planting is completed depends partly on the number 
of separate operations completed on each acre. Reducing the number of tillage practices 
performed or performing more than one practice in the same trip effectively decreases the 
amount of machinery capacity needed to complete field operations on time. Of course, 
machinery cost savings from reduced tillage must be compared to possible increased chemical 
costs and effects on yields. 
ESTIMATING POWER REQUIREMENTS 
Estimation of draft 
            In order to determine the draft requirement of an implement it is necessary to use a pull 
meter. Estimation of likely draft requirements can be taken from the table provided. However, 
these values will vary according to soil type, soil moisture, depth of working, ground speed 
and manufacturer. 
Table 3 Estimating Draft Requirements 
Implement Draft per Unit Width (kN/m) 
Chisel plough 
Blade plough 
Disc plough 
Scarifier 
Cultivator 
Planter 
4.5-5.5 
4.0-4.5 
5.0-6.0 
4.0-4.5 
3.0-3.5 
2.5-3.5 
 
A figure for total draft can be calculated by simply multiplying implement width by draft per 
unit width. Considering the example using the chisel plough, then: 
Total draft                    = width (m) x draft / metre (kN/m) 
                                    = 7.8 x 5 
                                    = 39 kN ( approx. 3900 kgf) 
If a scarifier was used to replace the chisel plough, the draft per unit width would decrease to 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
166 
4.5 kN/m and the resultant total draft would be 35 kN (3500 kgf). Remember this is draft or 
pull, not drawbar power. 
Estimation of drawbar power 
Drawbar power can be related to draft and speed, by using the formula below. Any one 
drawbar power level may be attained by a combination of pull and speed. That is, a large pull 
at a low speed could produce the same drawbar power as a small pull at high speed. 
Drawbar power           =          pull (kN) x speed* (km/hr) 
                                                            3.6 (constant) 
Using the same chisel plough as in the previous example, the power requirements become: 
Drawbar power           =       39 x 8 
                                                3.6 
                               = 87 kW (116hp). 
*Speed has been determined by the initial assumption when working out the required 
implement width. 
Note: Kilowatts (kW) x 1.34    = Horsepower (hp) 
Horsepower (hp) x 0.746        = Kilowatts (kW) 
          
   At this point, it would pay to work through all of the tillage operations and determine the 
requirements for each, after closely considering the time available and field efficiency. The 
largest power requirement would be then used in determining engine power. 
Estimating engine power 
            Once drawbar power has been calculated, a decision needs to be made about what type 
of tractor is to be used. 
The selection decision between wheels or tracks is far too complex a topic to be covered in this 
chapter. Suffice to say that if set-up and matched correctly, the operating costs should be 
similar for either tractive type. The decision between two wheel drive and four wheel drive is 
much simpler as it is determined by the minimum available size of a 4WD and the maximum 
size of a 2WD (that is approximately 150 kW or 200 hp). 
From Table 2, it is now possible to determine the size of tractor required. In using the 
comparative chart it would be unwise to determine engine size using the maximum power 
figure as conditions vary both from season to season and even within any one season. Having 
a little extra capacity is also a safeguard against overloading. A more realistic figure is the 
normal operation level. 
Table 4: Tractor Crankshaft Power (Chisel plough example) 
Tractor Drawbar HP/ Efficiency Crankshaft Power (kW) 
2WD 
FWA 
4WD 
Tracklayer 
(87 x 100)/40 
(87 x 100)/45 
(87 x 100)/50) 
87 x 100)/65 
=217 kW  (290 hp) 
=193 kW  (259 hp) 
=174 kW  (232 hp) 
=134 kW  (178 hp) 

 
Farm Power and Machinery 
 
 
167 
CONCLUSION 
            If a step by step approach is used when matching power units and implements, it is 
possible to eliminate the majority of guess work that is normally employed when a machinery 
purchase decision is made. 
This approach is simplistic but does allow changes to any of the inputs. Care must be taken not 
to overestimate either the time available to complete the task or field efficiency. 
APPENDIX 
Table 1 shows estimated draft requirements for various implements 
Table 1 . Default Values for Speed, Field Efficiency, and Draft Requirements. 
Equipment Name Speed 
(mph) 
Draft (lb. per unit 
of width) 
Average Range 
Tillage 
Moldboard plow (16 in. 
bottom, 7 in. deep) 
Light soil 
Medium soil  
Heavy soil  
Clay soil 
  
5.0  
4.5  
4.5  
4.0 
  
320 
500 
800  
1200 
  
220 - 430 per foot 
t350 - 650 per foot 
580 - 1,140 per 
foot 
1,000 - 1,400 per 
foot 
Chisel-plow 
(7-9 in. deep) 
5.0  500   200 - 800 per 
shank 
Disk 
Single gang  
Tandem  
Heavy or offset  
  
5.5  
5.5 
5.0 
  
75 
200   
325  
  
50 - 100 per foot 
100 - 300 per foot 
250 - 400 per foot  
Field cultivator 5.0 300 200 - 400 per foot 
Spring-tooth harrow 5.0 200 70 - 300 per foot 
Spike-tooth harrow 6.0 50 20 - 60 per foot 
Roller or packer 5.0 100 20 - 150 per foot 
Cultivator 
Field (3-5 in. deep)  
Row crop 
  
5.0  
4.5 
  
250  
80  
  
60 - 300 per foot 
40 - 120 per foot 
Rotary hoe 7.5  84   30 - 100 per foot 
Subsoiler (16 in. deep) 
Light soil  
Medium soil  
Heavy soil 
  
4.5  
4.5  
  
1500  
2000  
  
1,100 - 1,800 per  
1,600 - 2,600 per 

  www.AgriMoon.Com 
 
168 
4.5 2600 2,000 - 3,000 per 
Planting 
Planter only   
Planter with attachments   
Grain drill  
No-till drill 
 
5.0  
5.0 
5.0  
5.0 
 
150   
350 
5.0 
200 
 
100 - 180 per row  
250 - 400 per row 
 
30 - 100 per foot 
160 - 240 per foot 
Applying Chemicals 
Anhydrous ammonia 
applic. 
4.5 425 375 - 450 per 
shank 
  
 
 
 
This Book Download From e-course of ICAR  
Visit for Other Agriculture books, News, 
Recruitment, Information, and Events at 
www.agrimoon.com 
Give FeedBack & Suggestion at info@agrimoon.com 
Disclaimer: 
The information on this website does not warrant or assume any legal liability or 
responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or usefulness of the courseware contents. 
The contents are provided free for noncommercial purpose such as teaching, 
training, research, extens ion and self learning. 
******☺****** 