

Programme-   B.Sc (Agriculture) 
 
Course -   
Principles and Methods of Soil and Water 
Conservation 
Course Code-   BSCAG-214 
 
Semester -   III
rd
  
  
Year-    2020-21 
 
Unit-    5 
   
Topic-    
Soil Erosion and its Types 
 
Sub-Topic-    
Introduction, Principles of Soil Erosion,  
    Wind erosion- Type, Factor affecting 
    Water erosion- Type, Factor affecting 
    Mechanism of Soil erosion 
    Effect of Soil erosion  
 
Faculty- Mr. Sharwan Kumar 
 
E-mail-   sharwanp0782@gmail.com
 
 
Soil Erosion and its Types 
 Introduction 
Soil erosion is the process by which soil is removed from the Earth's surface by exogenetic 
processes such as wind or water flow, and then transported and deposited in other locations. 
In general, soil erosion implies the physical removal of topsoil by various agents, including 
rain,  water  flowing  over  and  through  the  soil  profile,  wind,  glaciers  or  gravitational  pull. 
Land  and  water  are  the  most  precious  natural  resources  that  support  and  sustain  the 
anthropogenic  activities.  In  India  particularly,  about  65%  of  the  population  depend  on 
agriculture, the only sector which generates half of the employment and maintain ecological 
balance. 
 
Soil  erosion in  India  is  amongst  the  leading  areas  of  concern  as  it  affects  cultivation  and 
farming in the country in adverse and unfavourable ways. Soil erosion leads to deprivation of 
physical  characteristics  of  soils and  damages  plant and  crops.  In  India almost  130 million 
hectares  of  land,  i.e.,  45  %  of  total  geographical  surface  area,  is  affected  by  serious  soil 
erosion  through  gorge  and  gully,  shifting  cultivation,  cultivated  wastelands,  sandy  areas, 
deserts and water logging. Soil erosion by  rain and transportation  of soil particles  through 
rivulets that takes place in hilly areas causes severe landslides and floods. The anthropogenic 
activities including cutting trees for agricultural implements, firewood and timber; grazing by 
a large number of livestock over and above the carrying capacity of grass lands, traditional 
agricultural  practices,  construction  of  roads,  indiscriminate  quarrying  and  other  activities, 
have all led to the opening of top surfaces to extreme soil erosion. In Indian condition, the 
control  of  soil  erosion  is  a  challenging  task  in  the  sense  that  the  onset  of  monsoon  often 

coincides with the kharif sowing and transplanting. In this stage of kharif crop when canopy 
cover is minimal, major part of the land is exposed to the rainfall let the land prone to soil 
erosion. It is prudent to check soil erosion from agricultural lands since it affects majority of 
people. 
 
 Principles of Soil Erosion 
 Causes of Soil Erosion 
No single unique cause can be held responsible for soil erosion or assumed as the main cause 
for  this  problem.  There  are  many  underlying  factors  responsible  for  this  process,  some 
induced  by  nature  and  others  by  human  being.  The  main  causes  of  soil  erosion  can  be 
enumerated as: 
Destruction of Natural Protective Cover by 
 Indiscriminate cutting of trees, 
 Overgrazing of the vegetative cover and 
 Forest fires. 
Improper Use of the Land 
 Keeping the land barren subjecting it to the action of rain and wind, 
 Growing of crops that accelerate soil erosion, 
 Removal of organic matter and plant nutrients by injudicious cropping patterns, 
 Cultivation along the land slope, and 
 Faulty methods of irrigation. 
 Types of Soil Erosion: 
According  to  Origin: Soil erosion can broadly be categorized into two types i.e. geologic 
erosion and accelerated erosion. 
Geological  Erosion: Under  natural  undisturbed  conditions  an  equilibrium  is  established 
between the climate of a place and the vegetative cover that protects the soil layer. Vegetative 
covers  like  trees  and  forests  retard  the  transportation  of  soil  material and  act  as  a  check 
against excessive erosion. A certain amount of erosion, however, does take place even under 
the natural cover. This erosion, called geologic erosion, is a slow process and is compensated 
by  the formation  of  soil  under  the  natural  weathering  process.  Its  effect  are  not  of  much 
consequence so far as agricultural lands are concerned. 
Accelerated  Erosion:  When  land  is  put  under  cultivation,  the  natural  balance  existing 
between  the  soil,  its  vegetation  cover  and  climate  is  disturbed.  Under  such  condition,  the 
removal of surface soil due to natural agencies takes places at faster rate than it can be built 
by  the  soil  formation  process.  Erosion  occurring  under  these  condition  is  referred  to  as 
accelerated erosion. Its rates are higher than geological erosion. Accelerated erosion depletes 
soil fertility in agricultural land. 
According  to  Erosion  Agents: Soil  erosion  is  broadly  categorized  into  different  types 
depending  on  the  agent  which  triggers  the  erosion  activity.  Mentioned  below  are the  four 
main types of soil erosion. 
(1) Water Erosion: Water erosion is seen in many parts of the world. In fact, running water 
is the most common agent of soil erosion. This includes rivers which erode the river basin, 
rainwater which erodes various landforms, and the sea waves which erode the coastal areas. 
Water erodes and transports soil particles from higher altitude and deposits them in low lying 
areas. Water erosion may further be classified, based on different actions of water responsible 
for erosion, as : (i) raindrop erosion, (ii) sheet erosion, (iii) rill erosion, (iv) gully erosion, (v) 
stream bank erosion, and (vi) slip erosion. 

(2) Wind Erosion: Wind erosion is most often witnessed in dry areas wherein strong winds
brush against various landforms, cutting through them and loosening the soil particles, which 
are lifted and transported towards the direction in which the wind blows. The best example of 
wind erosion are sand dunes and mushroom rocks structures, typically found in deserts.
(3) Glacial  Erosion:  Glacial  erosion,  also  referred  to  as  ice  erosion,  is  common  in  cold 
regions at high altitudes. When soil comes in contact with large moving glaciers, it sticks to 
the base of these glaciers. This is eventually transported with the glaciers, and as 
melting it is deposited in the course of the moving chunks of ice.
(4) Gravitational Erosion: Although gravitational erosion is not as common a phenomenon
as water erosion, it can cause huge damage to natural, as well as man
basically the mass movement of soil due to gravitational force. The best examples of this are
Agents of Soil Erosion 
Soil erosion is the detachment of soil from its original location and transportation to a new 
location.  Mainly  water  is  responsible  for  this
glaciers are also the agents causing soil erosion. Water in the form of rain, flood and runoff 
badly affects the soil. Soil is in fact a composite of sand, silt and clay. When the rain falls 
along the mountains and bare soil, the water detaches the soil particles, and takes away the 
silt and clay particles along with the flowing water. Similarly, when wind blows in the form 
of storms, its speed becomes too high to lift off the entire soil upper layer and causes soil
erosion. 
Other factors responsible for soil erosion are human and animal activities. Vegetation is the 
natural cover of soil. When the animals continuously graze in the pastures, the vegetation is 
removed due to their walking and grazing. Bare lands
erosion. Activities of human like forest cutting, increased agriculture, and clearing of land for 
different purposes are the other agents that cause erosion of the soil. The soil erosion agent 
can be classified and summarized as shown in Fig.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Broadly, soil erosion can be divided into three categories depending on the eroding agents 
namely water erosion, wind erosion and chemical or geological erosion. Soil erosion due to 
the agents like water and wind is mostly prevalent and tangible. The erosi
chemical and geological agents is a slow process and continues to years and often it is non
tangible. Water erosion is further subdivided into classes depending on the effect of water 
: Wind erosion is most often witnessed in dry areas wherein strong winds
rms, cutting through them and loosening the soil particles, which 
are lifted and transported towards the direction in which the wind blows. The best example of 
wind erosion are sand dunes and mushroom rocks structures, typically found in deserts.
:  Glacial  erosion,  also  referred  to  as  ice  erosion,  is  common  in  cold 
at high altitudes. When soil comes in contact with large moving glaciers, it sticks to 
the base of these glaciers. This is eventually transported with the glaciers, and as 
melting it is deposited in the course of the moving chunks of ice. 
: Although gravitational erosion is not as common a phenomenon
as water erosion, it can cause huge damage to natural, as well as man-made structures. It is 
asically the mass movement of soil due to gravitational force. The best examples of this are
Soil erosion is the detachment of soil from its original location and transportation to a new 
location.  Mainly  water  is  responsible  for  this erosion  although  in  many  locations  wind, 
glaciers are also the agents causing soil erosion. Water in the form of rain, flood and runoff 
badly affects the soil. Soil is in fact a composite of sand, silt and clay. When the rain falls 
bare soil, the water detaches the soil particles, and takes away the 
silt and clay particles along with the flowing water. Similarly, when wind blows in the form 
of storms, its speed becomes too high to lift off the entire soil upper layer and causes soil
Other factors responsible for soil erosion are human and animal activities. Vegetation is the 
natural cover of soil. When the animals continuously graze in the pastures, the vegetation is 
removed due to their walking and grazing. Bare lands left behind are easily affected by soil 
erosion. Activities of human like forest cutting, increased agriculture, and clearing of land for 
different purposes are the other agents that cause erosion of the soil. The soil erosion agent 
summarized as shown in Fig. 
Broadly, soil erosion can be divided into three categories depending on the eroding agents 
namely water erosion, wind erosion and chemical or geological erosion. Soil erosion due to 
the agents like water and wind is mostly prevalent and tangible. The erosi
chemical and geological agents is a slow process and continues to years and often it is non
tangible. Water erosion is further subdivided into classes depending on the effect of water 
: Wind erosion is most often witnessed in dry areas wherein strong winds 
rms, cutting through them and loosening the soil particles, which 
are lifted and transported towards the direction in which the wind blows. The best example of 
wind erosion are sand dunes and mushroom rocks structures, typically found in deserts. 
:  Glacial  erosion,  also  referred  to  as  ice  erosion,  is  common  in  cold 
at high altitudes. When soil comes in contact with large moving glaciers, it sticks to 
the base of these glaciers. This is eventually transported with the glaciers, and as they start 
: Although gravitational erosion is not as common a phenomenon 
made structures. It is 
asically the mass movement of soil due to gravitational force. The best examples of this are 
Soil erosion is the detachment of soil from its original location and transportation to a new 
erosion  although  in  many  locations  wind, 
glaciers are also the agents causing soil erosion. Water in the form of rain, flood and runoff 
badly affects the soil. Soil is in fact a composite of sand, silt and clay. When the rain falls 
bare soil, the water detaches the soil particles, and takes away the 
silt and clay particles along with the flowing water. Similarly, when wind blows in the form 
of storms, its speed becomes too high to lift off the entire soil upper layer and causes soil 
Other factors responsible for soil erosion are human and animal activities. Vegetation is the 
natural cover of soil. When the animals continuously graze in the pastures, the vegetation is 
left behind are easily affected by soil 
erosion. Activities of human like forest cutting, increased agriculture, and clearing of land for 
different purposes are the other agents that cause erosion of the soil. The soil erosion agent 
Broadly, soil erosion can be divided into three categories depending on the eroding agents 
namely water erosion, wind erosion and chemical or geological erosion. Soil erosion due to 
the agents like water and wind is mostly prevalent and tangible. The erosion caused through 
chemical and geological agents is a slow process and continues to years and often it is non-
tangible. Water erosion is further subdivided into classes depending on the effect of water 

erosion. These include sheet erosion, rill erosion, gully erosion, land slide or slip erosion and 
stream bank erosion. 
 
 
 Geologic Erosion 
Geologic erosion sometimes referred to as natural or normal erosion; represent erosion under 
the cover of vegetation. It includes soil as well as soil eroding processes that maintain the soil 
in favourable balance, suitable for the growth of most plants. The rate of erosion is so slow 
that the loss of soil is compensated by the formation of new soil under natural weathering 
processes. The various topographical features such as existing of streams, valleys, etc. are the 
results of geologic erosion. 
 Wind Erosion 
Wind erosion is the detachment, transportation and redeposition of soil particles by wind. A 
sparse or absent vegetative cover, a loose, dry and smooth soil surface, large fields and strong 
winds all increase the risk of wind erosion. Air movement must attain a certain velocity (with 
enough  speed  to  generate  visible  movement  of  particles  at  the  soil  level)  before  it  can 
generate deflation and transport of particles. Winds with velocities of less than 12-19 km/hr 
seldom impart sufficient energy at the soil surface to dislodge and put into motion sand-sized 
particles.  Drifting  of  highly  erosive  soil  usually  starts  when  the  wind  attains  a  forward 
velocity of 25-30 km/hr. Wind erosion tends to occur mostly in low rainfall areas when soil 
moisture content is at wilting point or below, but all drought-stricken soils are at risk. Often 
the only evidence of wind erosion is an atmospheric haze of dust comprising fine mineral and 
organic soil particles that contain most of the soil nutrients. Actions to minimize wind erosion 
include  improving  soil  structure  so  wind  cannot  lift  the  heavier  soil  aggregates;  retaining 
vegetative  cover  to  reduce  wind  speed  at  the  ground  surface;  and  planting  windbreaks  to 
reduce  wind  speed.  Also,  be  ready  for  severe  wind  erosion  seasons  which  tend  to  be  the 
summers following dry autumns and winters. The most familiar result of wind erosion is the 
loss of topsoil and nutrients, which reduces the soil's ability to produce crops. Topsoil loss 
can be seen as rocky or gravelly knolls, thin soils mixed with lighter coloured subsoil, or the 
presence of calcium carbonate in surface soils. 
Soil productivity is affected by wind erosion in various ways. Areas of erosion and deposition 
within  a  field  increase  the  variation  in  soil  characteristics,  requiring  more  costly  and  less 
efficient  soil  management  practices.  Wind  removes  the  smaller  clay  particles  and  organic 
matter  from  the  soil  while  coarser  materials  are  left  behind.  The  continued  loss  of  fine 
particles reduces soil quality. In shallow soils and soils with a hardpan layer, wind erosion 
also  results  in  decreased  root  zone  depth  and  water-holding  capacity.  Such  changes  may 
occur  slowly  and  go  unnoticed  for  many  years  especially  if  mixing  by  tillage  masks  the 
effects of wind erosion. 
 Process of Wind Erosion 
The process of wind erosion comprises of three basic stages namely saltation, suspension and 
surface creep. Fig. 2 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.2 Process of wind erosion 
 Saltation: Saltation occurs when the wind lifts larger particles off the ground for short 
distances,  leading  to  sand  drifts.  Fine  and  medium  sand-sized  particles  are  lifted  a 
short distance into the air, dislodging more soil as they fall back to the ground. 
 Suspension: Suspension occurs when the wind lifts finer particles into the air leading 
to dust storms. Very fine soil particles are lifted from the surface by the impact of 
saltation and carried high into the air, remaining suspended in air for long distances. 
 Surface  Creep:  The movement  of large  soil  particles along  the  surface of  the soil 
after being loosened by the impact of saltating particles. 
 Extent of Wind Erosion 
Several factors, other than the wind velocity itself, contribute to wind erosion. These fall into 
two main groups of closely interrelated elements: those inherent in the properties of the soil 
per se and those associated with soil cover. A rough soil structure, especially at the surface, 
effectively reduces the movement of soil particles. Arid regions, however, are dominated by 
smooth, pulverized and structure less top soils. Soil texture also influences soil erodibility; 
soils of fine texture are, for example, particularly susceptible to wind erosion. 
Measurements of dust in the air up to three metres above the soil surface at Jodhpur, 
India, showed that on a stormy day the amount of dust blowing varied between 50 and 420 
kg/ha. In the Jaisalmer region of India, where wind speeds generally are higher, average soil 
loss of 511 kg/ha was recorded. 
 Water Erosion 
The soil erosion caused by water as an agent is called water erosion. In water erosion, 
the water acts as an agent to dislodge and transport the eroded soil particle from one location 
to another. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
Fig. 4 Process of water erosion 
 Extent of Water Erosion 
The extent of water erosion in Indian subcontinent are presented in Table 1.2. In India, 32.8 
Mha area in India is affected by water erosion which accounts for 18% of the land. However, 
the water erosion extent estimated by different sources varies from 87 to 111 Mha in India. 
Table 6 Extent of erosion in India unit- (1000 ha) 
S. No. Name of the States Water Erosion Wind Erosion 
1 Andhra Pradesh 11518 0 
2 Arunachal  Pradesh 2372 0 
3 Assam 688 0 
4 Bihar+ Jharkhand 3024 0 
5 Goa 60 0 
6 Gujarat 5207 443 
7 Haryana 315 536 
8 Himachal Pradesh 2718 0 
9 Jammu & Kashmir 5460 1360 
10 Karnataka 5810 0 
11 Kerala 76 0 
12 Madhya Pradesh + Chhattisgarh 17883 0 
13 Maharastra 11179 0 
14 Manipur 133 0 
15 Mizoram 137 0 
16 Meghalaya 137 0 
17 Nagaland 390 0 
18 Orissa 5028 0 
19 Punjab 372 282 
20 Rajasthan 3137 6650 
21 Sikkim 158 0 
22 Tamil Nadu 4926 0 
23 Tripura 121 0 
24 Uttar Pradesh + Uttarakhand 11392 212 
25 West Bengal 1197 0 
26 Delhi 55 0 
27 Union Territories 187 0 
 
Grand Total 93680 9483 
 
Grand Total(Million ha) 93.68 9.48 
 
Forms of Water Erosion: 
The impact of rainfall causes splash erosion. Runoff water causes scraping and transport of 
soil particles leading to sheet, rill and gully erosion. Water waves cause erosion of bank sides 
of reservoirs, lakes and oceans. The subsurface runoff causes soil erosion in the form of pipe 
erosion, which is also called tunnel erosion. The glacial erosion causes heavy landsides. In 

India, glacial erosions are mainly confined to Himalayan regions. The various forms of water 
erosion are given below. 
 
 Hydraulic Action: The hydraulic action takes place when water runs over the soil surface 
compressing the soil, as a result of which the air present in the voids exerts a pressure on the 
soil particles and this leads to the soil detachment. The pressure exerted by the air voids is 
called hydraulic pressure. The soil particles so detached from their places, are scoured by the 
running water. The hydraulic action is more effective when the soil is in loose condition. 
Abrasion: Soil particles mixed with the running water create an abrasive power in the water 
which increases the capacity of flowing water to scour more soil particles. Due to this effect, 
larger soil particles are eroded by the flowing water. 
Attrition: This  form  includes  mechanical  breakdown  of  loads running  along  the  moving 
water due to collision of particles with each other. The broken particles are moved along with 
the  flow  velocity,  which  generate  abrasion  effect  on  the  bottom  and  banks  of  the  water 
course. This effect pronounces the water erosion. 
Solution: This form is associated with the chemical action between running water and soil or 
country rocks. This type condition is observed in areas where existing rocks or soils are easily 
dissolved in the running water. 
Transportation: The process of soil transportation by running water is completed under the 
following forms: 
Saltation: the  water  soluble  contents  present  in  the  water are  transported  by  the  water  in 
solution form. 
Suspension: it  involves  the  transportation  of  finer  soil  particles,  which  are  present  in 
suspension form in the flowing water. 
Surface Creep: it involves transportation of medium size soil particles that are not able to 
stand in suspension form, but are mixed in water and flow over the stream bed in the form of 
mud. The surface creep action is responsible for transporting the coarser soil particles. 
 Types of Water Erosion 
The different types of water erosion are described in the following section. 
 Splash Erosion 
This type of soil erosion is because of the action of raindrop. The kinetic energy of 
falling raindrop dislodges the soil particle and the resultant runoff transports soil particles. 
Splash erosion is the first stage of soil erosion by water. It occurs when raindrops hit bare 
soil.  The  explosive  impact  breaks  up  soil  aggregates  so  that  individual  soil  particles  are 
‘splashed’ onto the soil surface. The splashed particles can rise as high 0.60 meter above the 
ground and move up to 1.5 meter from the point of impact. The particles block the spaces 
between soil aggregates, so that the soil forms a crust that reduces infiltration and increases 
runoff. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 Sheet Erosion 
Sheet  erosion is  the  removal  of  soil  in  thin  layers  by  raindrop  impact  and  shallow 
surface flow. This action called skimming and is prevalent in the agricultural land. It results 
in  loss  of  the finest  soil  particles  that  contain  most  of  the  available  nutrients  and  organic 
matter  in  the  soil.  Soil  loss  is  so  gradual  that  the  erosion  usual
cumulative  impact  accounts  for  large  soil  losses.  This  type  of  soil  erosion  is  mainly 
responsible  for  loss  of  soil  productivities.  Soils  most  vulnerable  to  sheet  erosion  are 
overgrazed and cultivated soils where there is little v
Early signs of sheet erosion include bare areas, water puddling as soon as rain falls, visible 
grass roots, exposed tree roots, and exposed subsoil or stony soils. Soil deposits on the high 
side of obstructions such as fences may indicate active sheet erosion.
Vegetation cover is vital to prevent sheet erosion because it protects the soil, impedes 
water flow and encourages water to infiltrate into the soil. The surface water flows that cause 
sheet erosion rarely flow for more than a few meters before concentrating into rills.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Rill Erosion 
Rills  formation  is  the  intermittent  process  of  transforming  to  gully  erosion.  The 
advance form of the rill is initial stage of gully formation. The rills are shallow drainage lines 
less  than  30cm  deep  and  50  cm  wide.  They  develop  when  surface  water  concent
depressions or low points through paddocks and erodes the soil. Rill erosion is common in 
bare agricultural land, particularly overgrazed land, and in freshly tilled soil where the soil 
structure  has  been  loosened.  The  rills  can  usually  be  removed
erosion is mostly occurs in alluvial soil and is quite frequent in Chambal river valley in India. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
is  the  removal of  soil  in  thin  layers  by  raindrop  impact  and shallow 
surface flow. This action called skimming and is prevalent in the agricultural land. It results 
in  loss  of  the finest  soil  particles  that  contain  most  of  the  available  nutrients  and  organic 
matter  in  the  soil.  Soil  loss  is  so  gradual  that  the  erosion  usually  goes  unnoticed,  but  the 
cumulative  impact  accounts  for  large  soil  losses.  This  type  of  soil  erosion  is  mainly 
responsible  for  loss  of  soil  productivities.  Soils  most  vulnerable  to  sheet  erosion  are 
overgrazed and cultivated soils where there is little vegetation to protect and hold the soil. 
Early signs of sheet erosion include bare areas, water puddling as soon as rain falls, visible 
grass roots, exposed tree roots, and exposed subsoil or stony soils. Soil deposits on the high 
as fences may indicate active sheet erosion. 
Vegetation cover is vital to prevent sheet erosion because it protects the soil, impedes 
water flow and encourages water to infiltrate into the soil. The surface water flows that cause 
for more than a few meters before concentrating into rills.
Rills  formation  is  the  intermittent  process  of  transforming  to  gully  erosion.  The 
advance form of the rill is initial stage of gully formation. The rills are shallow drainage lines 
less  than  30cm  deep  and  50  cm  wide.  They  develop  when  surface  water  concent
depressions or low points through paddocks and erodes the soil. Rill erosion is common in 
bare agricultural land, particularly overgrazed land, and in freshly tilled soil where the soil 
structure  has  been  loosened.  The  rills  can  usually  be  removed with  farm  machinery.  Rill 
erosion is mostly occurs in alluvial soil and is quite frequent in Chambal river valley in India. 
is  the  removal  of  soil  in  thin layers  by  raindrop  impact and shallow 
surface flow. This action called skimming and is prevalent in the agricultural land. It results 
in  loss  of  the finest  soil  particles  that  contain  most  of  the  available  nutrients  and  organic 
ly  goes  unnoticed,  but  the 
cumulative  impact  accounts  for  large  soil  losses.  This  type  of  soil  erosion  is  mainly 
responsible  for  loss  of  soil  productivities.  Soils  most  vulnerable  to  sheet  erosion  are 
egetation to protect and hold the soil. 
Early signs of sheet erosion include bare areas, water puddling as soon as rain falls, visible 
grass roots, exposed tree roots, and exposed subsoil or stony soils. Soil deposits on the high 
Vegetation cover is vital to prevent sheet erosion because it protects the soil, impedes 
water flow and encourages water to infiltrate into the soil. The surface water flows that cause 
for more than a few meters before concentrating into rills. 
Rills  formation  is  the  intermittent  process  of  transforming  to  gully  erosion.  The 
advance form of the rill is initial stage of gully formation. The rills are shallow drainage lines 
less  than  30cm  deep  and  50  cm  wide.  They  develop  when  surface  water  concentrates  in 
depressions or low points through paddocks and erodes the soil. Rill erosion is common in 
bare agricultural land, particularly overgrazed land, and in freshly tilled soil where the soil 
with  farm  machinery.  Rill 
erosion is mostly occurs in alluvial soil and is quite frequent in Chambal river valley in India.  

 
 
 
Fig.7. Rill Erosion 
 Gully Erosion 
The advance stage of rills is transformed into initial stage of gully. Gully formation 
are initiated when the depth and width of the rill is more than 50 cm. Gullies (Fig. 1.6) are 
deeper channels that cannot be removed by normal cultivation. Hillsides are more prone to 
gullying when they cleared of vegetation, through deforestation, over-grazing or other means. 
The eroded soil is easily carried by the flowing water after being dislodged from the ground, 
normally  when  rainfall  falls  during  short,  intense  storms.  Depending  upon  the  depth  and 
width, the gullies further divided into 4 classes namely G1, G2, G3 and G4. Gullies reduce 
the productivity of farmland where they incise into the land, and produce sediment that may 
clog downstream water bodies. Because of this, much effort are required to invested into the 
study of gullies within the scope of geomorphology, in the prevention of gully erosion, and in 
restoration  of  gullied  landscapes.  The  total  soil  loss  from  gully  formation  and  subsequent 
downstream river sedimentation can be sizable. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. 8 Gully Erosion 
 
             
                
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
           

 
 
 
 
Table: Classification of Gully
 
                 
      
Description of symbols of Gully 
  
 
Particulars 
  
G1 
  
G2 
  
G3 
  
G4 
  
             
                 
 Depth (m)   Up to 1.0   1.0-3.0   3.0-9.0   >9.0   
                 
 Width (m)   <18.0   <18.0   18   >18.0   
                 
 Side slope (%)   <6.0   <6.0   6.0-12.0   >12.0   
                 
               
 Tunnel Erosion 
Tunnel  erosion occurs  when  surface  water  moves  into  and  through  dispersive  sub 
soils. Dispersive soils are poorly structured so they erode easily when wet. The tunnel starts 
when surface water moves into the soil along cracks or channels or through rabbit burrows 
and old tree root cavities. Dispersive clays are the first to be removed by the water flow. As 
the space enlarges, more water can pour in and further erode the soil. As the tunnel expands, 
parts of the tunnel roof collapse leading to potholes and gullies. Indications of tunnel erosion 
include  water  seepage  at  the  foot  of  a  slope  and fine  sediment  fans  downhill  of  a  tunnel 
outlet. This type of erosion is more frequent in foothills where elevation is between 500-750 
meter. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig.9. Tunnel Erosion 

 
 
 
 
 Stream Bank Erosion
Stream bank erosion occurs where streams begin 
a consequence of increased peak flows or the removal of local protective vegetation. Stream 
bank  erosion  is  common  along  rivers,  streams  and  drains  where  banks  have  been  eroded, 
sloughed or undercut. This is quite preva
bank erosion becomes a problem where development has limited the meandering nature of 
streams, where streams have been channelized, or where stream bank structures (like bridges, 
culverts,  etc.)  are  located  in  places  where  they  can  actually  cause  damage  to  downstream 
areas.  Stabilizing  these areas  can  help  protect watercourses  from
damage to adjacent land uses, control unwanted meander, and improvement of habitat for fish 
and wildlife. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
 
 Coastal erosion 
The  waves,  geology  and geomorphology  are  the  three  major factors  that affect the 
coastal erosion. Waves are the
of the wind blowing over the surface of the sea, the length of fetch and the wind blowing 
time. The geology of the coastline also affects the rate of erosion. If the coast is made of a 
more resistant type of rock (say, granite), the erosion rate will be lo
made of a less resistant type of rock (say, boulder clay). The 
coastline further affects the rate of erosion. Headlands cause wave refraction, making waves 
converge  and  combining  their  energy.  Wider,
diverge,  losing  energy  due  to  friction  with  the  sea  bed.  A  wider  beach  cause  more  wave 
energy to be lost due to friction before the waves can break. A narrower beach will mean that 
the breaking point of the waves 
due to friction  before they break. Similarly, shingle  and  pebbles  will allow  more water  to 
infiltrate and cause more wave energy to be lost due to friction, while sandy beaches allow 
less infiltration and cause less friction and so allow for a higher rate of erosion. If the beach 
gradient  is  steep,  this  will encourage  steeper,  higher
because  shingle  and  pebble  beaches  leave  less  energy  for  backwash,  material
moved upwards, making the beach steeper. The coastal erosion is a major concern for India 
Stream Bank Erosion 
Stream bank erosion occurs where streams begin cutting deeper and wider channels as 
a consequence of increased peak flows or the removal of local protective vegetation. Stream 
bank  erosion  is  common  along  rivers,  streams  and  drains  where  banks  have  been  eroded, 
sloughed or undercut. This is quite prevalent in alluvial river and streams. Generally, stream 
bank erosion becomes a problem where development has limited the meandering nature of 
streams, where streams have been channelized, or where stream bank structures (like bridges, 
ated  in  places  where  they  can  actually  cause  damage  to  downstream 
areas.  Stabilizing  these areas  can  help  protect watercourses from continued  sedimentation, 
damage to adjacent land uses, control unwanted meander, and improvement of habitat for fish 
 (b) 
Fig10. Stream Bank Erosion 
 
The  waves,  geology  and  geomorphology  are  the  three  major factors  that affect the 
coastal erosion. Waves are the cause of coastal erosion. Wave energy is the result the speed
of the wind blowing over the surface of the sea, the length of fetch and the wind blowing 
of the coastline also affects the rate of erosion. If the coast is made of a 
more resistant type of rock (say, granite), the erosion rate will be lower than if the coast is 
made of a less resistant type of rock (say, boulder clay). The geomorphology
coastline further affects the rate of erosion. Headlands cause wave refraction, making waves 
converge  and  combining  their energy.  Wider, shallower  bays,  meanwhile,  allow  waves  to 
diverge,  losing  energy  due  to  friction  with  the  sea  bed.  A  wider  beach  cause  more  wave 
energy to be lost due to friction before the waves can break. A narrower beach will mean that 
the breaking point of the waves is closer to the coastline, and less energy will have been lost 
due to friction before they  break.  Similarly,  shingle  and  pebbles will  allow  more water  to 
infiltrate and cause more wave energy to be lost due to friction, while sandy beaches allow 
ltration and cause less friction and so allow for a higher rate of erosion. If the beach 
gradient is  steep,  this  will  encourage  steeper,  higher-energy  waves.  Paradoxically,  though, 
because  shingle  and  pebble  beaches  leave  less  energy  for  backwash,  material
moved upwards, making the beach steeper. The coastal erosion is a major concern for India 
cutting deeper and wider channels as 
a consequence of increased peak flows or the removal of local protective vegetation. Stream 
bank  erosion  is  common  along  rivers,  streams  and  drains  where  banks  have  been  eroded, 
lent in alluvial river and streams. Generally, stream 
bank erosion becomes a problem where development has limited the meandering nature of 
streams, where streams have been channelized, or where stream bank structures (like bridges, 
ated  in  places  where  they  can  actually  cause  damage  to  downstream 
continued  sedimentation, 
damage to adjacent land uses, control unwanted meander, and improvement of habitat for fish 
The  waves,  geology  and  geomorphology  are  the  three  major  factors  that  affect  the 
cause of coastal erosion. Wave energy is the result the speed 
of the wind blowing over the surface of the sea, the length of fetch and the wind blowing 
of the coastline also affects the rate of erosion. If the coast is made of a 
wer than if the coast is 
geomorphology (or shape) of the 
coastline further affects the rate of erosion. Headlands cause wave refraction, making waves 
shallower  bays,  meanwhile,  allow  waves  to 
diverge,  losing  energy  due  to  friction  with  the  sea  bed.  A  wider  beach  cause  more  wave 
energy to be lost due to friction before the waves can break. A narrower beach will mean that 
is closer to the coastline, and less energy will have been lost 
due to friction before they break. Similarly, shingle  and  pebbles  will  allow more  water to 
infiltrate and cause more wave energy to be lost due to friction, while sandy beaches allow 
ltration and cause less friction and so allow for a higher rate of erosion. If the beach 
energy  waves.  Paradoxically,  though, 
because  shingle  and  pebble  beaches  leave  less  energy  for  backwash,  material tends  to  be 
moved upwards, making the beach steeper. The coastal erosion is a major concern for India 

as about 40% of the Indian coasts are subjected to severe erosion that has the pote
change the coast line. 
 
 
 
Mechanics of Soil Erosion
Soil erosion is initiated by detachment of soil particles due to action of rain. The detached 
particles are transported by erosion agents from one place to another and finally get settled at 
some place leading to soil erosion p
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Fig. Process of water erosion by the impact of raindrops.
 
 
 
 
 
Mechanics of soil erosion due to water and wind is discussed below.
Mechanics of Water Erosion
There are three steps for accelerated erosion by water:
 Detachment  or  loosening  of  soil  particles  caused  by  flowing  water,  freezing  and 
thawing of the top soil, and/or the impact of falling raindrops,
 Transportation of soil particles by floating, rolling, dragging, and/or spla
 Deposition of transported particles at some places of lower elevation.
Rain enhances the translocation of soil through the process of splashing as shown in Fig.2.2. 
Individual  raindrops  detach  soil aggregates  and  redeposit  them  as  particles.  T
particles may then plug soil pores, reducing water intake (infiltration). Once the soil dries, 
these particles develop into a crust at the soil surface and runoff is further increased.
Mechanics of Wind Erosion:
Wind erosion occurs where soil is exposed to the dislodging force of wind. The intensity of 
wind erosion varies with surface roughness, slope and types of cover on the soil surface and 
wind  velocity,  duration  and angle  of  incidence.  Fine  soil  particles  can  be  carried  to  great 
heights  and  for  (may  be)  hundreds  of  kilometers.  The  overall  occurrence  of  wind  erosion 
could be described in three different phases. These are initiation of movement, transportation 
and deposition. 
Initiation of Movement: The initiation of the movement of
factors  acting  separately  in  combination.  In  the  course  of  collision  of  grains  rolling  and 
as about 40% of the Indian coasts are subjected to severe erosion that has the pote
Mechanics of Soil Erosion 
Soil erosion is initiated by detachment of soil particles due to action of rain. The detached 
particles are transported by erosion agents from one place to another and finally get settled at 
some place leading to soil erosion process. Different soil erosion processes are shown in Fig.
Process of water erosion by the impact of raindrops. 
Mechanics of soil erosion due to water and wind is discussed below. 
Mechanics of Water Erosion 
for accelerated erosion by water: 
Detachment  or  loosening  of  soil  particles  caused  by  flowing  water,  freezing  and 
thawing of the top soil, and/or the impact of falling raindrops, 
Transportation of soil particles by floating, rolling, dragging, and/or spla
Deposition of transported particles at some places of lower elevation.
Rain enhances the translocation of soil through the process of splashing as shown in Fig.2.2. 
Individual  raindrops  detach  soil  aggregates  and  redeposit  them  as  particles.  T
particles may then plug soil pores, reducing water intake (infiltration). Once the soil dries, 
these particles develop into a crust at the soil surface and runoff is further increased.
: 
soil is exposed to the dislodging force of wind. The intensity of 
wind erosion varies with surface roughness, slope and types of cover on the soil surface and 
wind  velocity,  duration  and angle  of  incidence.  Fine  soil  particles  can  be  carried  to  great 
ts  and  for  (may  be)  hundreds  of  kilometers.  The  overall  occurrence  of  wind  erosion 
could be described in three different phases. These are initiation of movement, transportation 
The initiation of the movement of soil particles is caused by
factors  acting  separately  in  combination.  In  the  course  of  collision  of  grains  rolling  and 
as about 40% of the Indian coasts are subjected to severe erosion that has the potential to 
Soil erosion is initiated by detachment of soil particles due to action of rain. The detached 
particles are transported by erosion agents from one place to another and finally get settled at 
processes are shown in Fig. 
Detachment  or  loosening  of  soil  particles  caused  by  flowing  water,  freezing  and 
Transportation of soil particles by floating, rolling, dragging, and/or splashing and 
Deposition of transported particles at some places of lower elevation. 
Rain enhances the translocation of soil through the process of splashing as shown in Fig.2.2. 
Individual  raindrops  detach  soil  aggregates  and  redeposit  them  as  particles.  The  dispersed 
particles may then plug soil pores, reducing water intake (infiltration). Once the soil dries, 
these particles develop into a crust at the soil surface and runoff is further increased.\ 
soil is exposed to the dislodging force of wind. The intensity of 
wind erosion varies with surface roughness, slope and types of cover on the soil surface and 
wind  velocity,  duration  and angle  of  incidence.  Fine  soil  particles  can  be  carried  to  great 
ts  and  for  (may  be)  hundreds  of  kilometers.  The  overall  occurrence  of  wind  erosion 
could be described in three different phases. These are initiation of movement, transportation 
soil particles is caused by several 
factors  acting  separately  in  combination.  In  the  course  of  collision  of  grains  rolling  and 

bumping on the surface, some particles may be bounced up. It occurs when the wind force or 
the impact of moving particles is strong enough to dislodge stationary soil particles. 
Transportation: The  transportation  of  the  particles  once  they  are  dislodged  take  place  in 
three ways: 
 Saltation – In  saltation  soil  particles  of  medium  size  (0.10-0.15  mm  diameter)  are 
carried by wind in a series of short bounces. These bounces are caused by the direct 
pressure of the wind on soil particles. 
 Surface Creep – Saltation also encourages surface creep (rolling or sliding) along the 
surface  of  the  particles  (0.5-1.0  mm  diameter).  The  bouncing particles  carried  by 
saltation strike the large aggregates and speed up their movement along the surface. 
 Suspension – When the particles of soil are very small (less than 0.1 mm) they are 
carried over  long  distances.  Finer  suspended  particles  are  moved  parallel  to  the 
ground surface and upward. 
Deposition: Deposition of the particles occurs when the gravitational force is greater than the 
forces  holding  the  particles  in  air.  Deposition  could  occur  when  the  wind  velocity  is 
decreased due to surface obstructions or other natural causes. 
 Effects of Soil Erosion 
The soil erosion adversely affects the livelihood of the people in one way or other. The major 
losses and problem occurs due to the soil erosion from various agents are listed below. 
 Siltation of rivers. 
 Siltation of irrigation channels and reservoirs. 
 Problems in crop irrigation and consequent need of conserving the water. 
 Damage to sea coast and formation of sand dunes. 
 Disease and public health hazards. 
 Soils  eroded  by  water  get  deposited  on river  beds,  thus  increasing  their  level  and 
causing floods. These floods sometime have various extreme effects, such as killing 
human and animals and damaging various buildings. 
 Soil erosion decreases the moisture supply by soil to the plants for their growth. It 
also affects the activity of soil micro-organisms thus deteriorating the crop yield. 
 Top layer of soil contains most of the organic matter and nutrients, loss of this soil 
reducing soil fertility and affecting its structure badly. 
 Wind  erosion  is  very  selective,  carrying  the  finest  particles - particularly  organic 
matter, clay and loam for many kilometres. There the wind erosion causes losses of 
fertile soils from highly productive farming areas. 
 The most spectacular forms are dunes - mounds of more or less sterile sand - which 
move as the wind takes them, even burying oases and ancient cities. 
 Sheets of sand travelling close to the ground (30 to 50 metres) can degrade crops. 
 Wind erosion reduces the capacity of the soil to store nutrients and water, thus making 
the environment drier. 
 
Reference Books   
 
1. 
Soil and water conservation Engineering. Suresh, R. 
2. 
Principles of Agricultural Engineering Ojha, T.P. and A.M.Michae 
3. 
Agricultural Engineering Singhal, O.P. 
 