

SOIL BIOLOGICAL PROPERTIES

Soilwillharbouravarietyofpopulationlivingorganismsi.e.bothplantsandanimals.The
livingorganismsrangeinsizefromlargerrodentsthroughwormsandinsectstothetiniest
bacteria.
Soil Biota 
Macro organisms
Rodents
Termites
Earthworms 
Micro organisms
Algae
Fungi
Bacteria 
Actinomycetes
Micro and Macro organisms are responsible for decomposition and mineralisation of 
organic matter
Diverse 
community of 
living organisms 

Sources of energy and carbon for soil organisms
•Autotrophic organisms
•Heterotrophic organisms

Autotrophic organisms
a) Photoautotrophic organisms
Will obtain their energy from the sun (solar energy) E.g. blue green algae
b) chemoautotrophic organisms
Will obtain their energy and carbon from oxidation of inorganic elements 
such as N, S, Fe containing compounds E.g. some bacteria (Denitrifying 
bacteria)
Heterotrophic organisms
Will obtain their energy and carbon from the decomposition of OM
E.g. bacteria and fungi. 

Macro organisms
EARTHWORMS
Sometimes known as ‘natures tillers’ because they bore holes and mix 
up soil particles
Found in moist, well-drained soils, high in Nitrogen, containing OM, and 
calcium
Importance of earthworms
✓Increase aeration and drainage
✓Increase availability of plant nutrients:
Improve soil aggregation (Structure):
Earthworms mix OM with the soil hence improving the size and stability 
of soil aggregates.

TERMITES
Termites aid decomposition of OM in or at the surface of the 
soil. 
Termites transport soil from lower layers to above the surface 
soil level thereby bringing mixing of soil and plant and animal 
residues.
Some soils from termites mounds are more fertile than the 
undisturbed soil. 
This is common in highly weathered soil, highly leached soils. 
In such soils the termites bring to the surface soils containing 
a lot of nutrients lost through leaching.

NEMATODES
▪Also known as threadworms and eelworms
▪Are round and spindle in shape
Grouped into three types:
➢Saprophytes – Live  on decayed OM
➢Predators – Feed  on other nematodes, bacteria, algae and 
protozoa.
➢Parasitic - Rely on roots of higher plants. Obtain organic 
molecules from plants and damage roots, therefore, this has a 
detrimental effect on nutrient uptake. Tobacco is one of the 
plants affected. 

Micro organisms
PROTOZOA
One-celled organisms but considerably larger than bacteria
Soil protozoa are classified into several groups based on their 
means of movement:
(a) Flagellates – Move about by means of 1 flagella
(b) Ciliates – Move about by cilia
(c) Amoebae – Move  about by pseudopodia
protozoa are generally, not sufficiently abundant in soils to be a 
major factor in OM decay and nutrient release.

ALGAE
•Unlike other organisms, algae are chlorophyll- bearing organisms. 
Because of that they are capable of photosynthesizing
•Found at or near soil surface where light is accessible
•Soil algae are also divided into several groups:
i.Green algae: dominant in acid and fertile soils
ii.Blue-green algae: dominant in rice fields (grasslands)
iii.Yellow-green algae
iv.Diatoms: numerous in old gardens

Importance of algae:
Mostly based on photosynthesizing algae
i. Generation of OM
▪Algae living at the soil surface are able to convert carbon dioxide to carbonaceous materials 
through the process of photosynthesis. 
▪Algae are capable of transforming barren, eroded areas to habitable environments for other 
organisms. 
ii. Weathering of rocks
The weathering of rocks is brought about by carbonic acids, which are produced from the respiration 
of algae and other organisms.
iii. Provision of oxygen to the rhizosphere
The photosynthetic process of algae produces oxygen, which is utilized by plants especially in flooded 
rice fields.
iv. Biological Nitrogen fixation
Algae have got the ability of assimilating N from the atmosphere for their own cell synthesis. 
Upon decay of algae cells the N is made available to the soil environment.

FUNGI
•Fungi are seen as a network of filamentous 
mycelium consisting of individual hypha strands.
•They are aerobic heterotrophs. There are some 
species which are tolerant to low oxygen and 
high carbon dioxide environments.
•Fungi dominate acidic environments especially 
where freshly OM  has been added
Groups of fungi
i. Moulds e.g. penicillin
ii. Mushroom fungi
iii. Yeast

Importance of fungi
a) Decomposition of OM
fungi contain no chlorophyll. Therefore will depend on OM as their source of energy and 
carbon. Therefore in the process of decomposing OM release plant nutrients
Fungi will carry on decomposition of OM after bacteria and actinomycetes have stopped.
b) Symbiotic relationship between fungi and plant roots
Plant will provide the fungus with organic exudes. In return fungus provides a more surface 
absorbing area of the plant roots such that the plant has the ability of exploring more areas in 
search for nutrients and water
c) Pathogenicity
Ability to cause diseases by fungi
E.g. Armillaria, fusarium

BACTERIA
•Are single celled organisms. They are one of the simplest forms of the life known.
•They occur in different shapes: round, rod, spiral
•Are either heterotrophic or autotrophic
Importance of Bacteria 
➢Decomposition of OM – Release of nutrients and humus
➢Nutrient transformation – change of nutrients from one form to another. 
i.  Nitrification – Oxidation of ammonium to produce nitrate:
 NH4+ + 2O2 → NO3- + H2O + 2H+
ii.  Sulfur oxidation – Sulfur  to sulfate: S →SO42-
iii. Biological Nitrogen Fixation – The assimilation of N from the atmosphere by bacteria that 
produce a specific enzyme which combine with nitrogen from the atmosphere. Fixation is 
either by symbiotic or non-symbiotic 

ACTINOMYCETES
•Occupies the position between true moulds (fungi) and bacteria.
•They resemble the moulds because they are also filamentous and 
they produce fruiting bodies. Their mycelia bodies are smaller than 
fungi.
•They are aerobic heterotrophs. They dominate in well-drained soils 
high in OM
Importance of actinomycetes:
➢Decomposition of OM
➢Synthesis of toxic metabolites:
Most of the actinomycetes will produce antimicrobial agents known as 
antibiotics which eliminate or inhibit growth of other micro organisms 
e.g. streptomycin, actinomycin