

Using
Databases
I N T R O D U C T I O N
B I L L Y  C L A R K
REFERENCE: Form 4, Unit 2. Pages 23-28. 
Senior Secondary Computer Studies, Andrew Nasalangwa. 

Learning 
Objectives
Students must be able to: 
1 define the term database 
2 describe types of databases 
3 explain the benefits of databases 
4 describe database models 
5 state features of databases 
6 name examples of database management software 
(DBMS) 

Introduction to databases
Managing data as a resource is an 
important task in any organisation 
today. This is because data within 
an organisation and its 
environment forms part of the 
strategic , tactical, operational 
management and decision making. 
In order to enhance convenient and 
easy storage and retrieval of data, 
we use databases. 
A database is defined as a 
collection of related data items 
organised so as to provide 
consistent and controlled access.

Define the term database in your own 
words...
Use the diagram to help your 
definition.
A database is...
database

Types of databases
There are two main types of databases:
Manual database Electronic database

Manual Database
A manual database consists if a collection of repository 
files and folders, each properly tagged and kept in 
proper sequence in a cabinet. For example, in a school 
the admission office stores all student file identified 
using unique student admission numbers such as 
201/2019, 202/2019 etc. However, as organisation data 
and information grows manual organization becomes 
difficult and time consuming resulting in issues.
Can you identify some issue with type of database 
management?

Manual Database
Redundancy –Redundancy refers to unnecessary 
duplication of data in multiple files
Lack of flexibility -It is difficult to search for a record.
Lack of integrity -Poor storage and maintenance of 
data may lead to unreliable and misleading reports.
Lack of sharing data –Data or information in difference 
manual files may not be available to other users.

Electronic databases
Electronic database refers to the use of electronic devices 
such as computers to store and organise files for easy access. 
For example, in Microsoft Windows, files are stored under 
one folderon a storage media. Actually, the term folder as 
used in Windows is a metaphor that refer to the way we keep 
documents in a physical document wallet also referred to as 
a ‘document folder’. 
Can you give the advantages of an electronic database?

Electronic databases
The advantage of electronic database systems provide users 
with tools for easy storage and access of data and 
information.

Database models
A database model is a logical structure that determines how data is stored, organised and 
manipulated by DBMS software (Database management software). Five common types of 
database models are; hierarchical model, network model, relational model, object/relational 
model and object orientated model. The most popular model is the relational database model.

Hierarchical Model
In the hierarchical model data is organised in hierarchical structure as seen in the image. For 
example to access level data, the user has to access the root first and follow the path to the 
level. A specific path leads to each item at lower levels. Hierarchical model is rarely used in 
modern database systems, hence obsolete.
◦Path
Root
Level 2 data item
Level 2 data itemLevel 2 data item

Network Model
The network model allows each record to have multiple parent and child records. This forms 
network structure as seen in the picture. In network models, access to a record can be through 
multiple paths and from any record. This type of record access structure is what is referred to as 
many to many relationship. Like the hierarchical model the network model is pretty much 
obsolete.
Canteen
Customers
Transactions
Suppliers

Relational Model
This is the most popular type of database. This is a model where two tables can be linked 
together such that a record from one table references to a record or records in another table. 
For example Table 1 and 2 show the customer and order table that are related to each other 
through customer number and customer ID. In this case, the orders table shows that customer 
number 450 has three orders in the orders table.
CustomernumberNameTelephone number
900Mary Njemile02078907
230Peter Onani0667896
450Bat Masamba04456000
Customer IDOrder IDDateAmount
9003802/3/201490000
4502342/3/20145000
4501232/4/201412000
4506674/4/201415000

Object relational Model
In software development, there is a shift from structured programming to object-orientated 
programming an object is a representation of real world using state and behaviour. This shift 
raised need for database model that stores and manipulates objects. Therefore object-relational 
is an evolutionary hybrid model that has capabilities to handle both relational and object 
orientated storage and manipulation of data

Object orientated Model
Object orientated models purely support storage, access and manipulation of objects. Although 
currently not popular in the market, object orientated database management systems provides 
unification of application and database development. This is different from current approaches 
in RDBMS where a separate application has to be developed to access a database.

Database structure
For easy storage, retrieval and manipulation, RDBMS organise data into a structure called a 
schema. A schema is an organisation structure made up of fields at the lowest level and 
database at the highest level.

Database structure definitions
Field –A field is a set of characters or logical combination of characters that defines a single data 
value
Record –A record is a collection of related fields that represent a single data item.
Table –A table is the equivalent of a file and contains a set of related records.
Database –A database is a collection of related tables and each table consists of related records 
made up of fields. This type of organisation is what is referred to as a database schema
Question –State the five types of database models.