

Unsaturated hydrocarbons 
–Reactions ofalkenes-
Part 1
Dr FatemaJagot

Types of Reactions
•There are three general types of reactions that organic compounds 
can undergo:
i.Addition reactions
ii.Substitution reactions
iii.Elimination reactions

Substitution and Elimination Reactions
•In a substitution reaction, one atom/group of atoms replaces another 
atom/group of atoms in a molecule;
•In an elimination reaction, one molecule splits into two molecules;

Addition Reactions
•In an addition reaction, two groups add to the carbons of the double 
bond and the carbons become saturated.
•The pi bond is broken to form two new sigma bonds to two new 
atoms/groups of atoms.
•Addition reactions are the most common reactions of the alkenes.

Addition Reactions of Alkenes
•The presence of double and triple bonds increases the hydrocarbons 
reactivity.
•Alkenes act as nucleophiles, due to the presence of the pi bond.
•To explain this, consider the structure of the pi bond:
•The pi electrons are delocalised (spread out) above and below the 
sigma bond. This is unlike in a sigma bond, where the electrons are 
tightly held.

•Therefore, the pi electrons are located further from the carbon nuclei, 
and are therefore loosely held (and hence easy to donate).
•Electrophiles have an affinity for these loosely held electrons.
•It can pull them away to form a new bond, leaving one of the carbon 
atoms with three bonds and a positive charge (a carbocation).
•In effect, the double bond has acted as a nucleophile, donating a pair 
of electrons to an electrophile.
•This type of addition reaction is known as an electrophilic addition
because an electrophile is adding to a nucleophile.

•Most addition reactions involve a second step in which a nucleophile 
adds to the carbocation to form a stable product.
•The general, key reaction mechanism for the electrophilic addition of 
electrophiles to alkenes is shown below:
Step 1: Attack of the electrophile on the double bond:
Step 2: Attack by the nucleophile gives the addition product:

•Several examples of addition reactions of alkenes are shown in the 
table below, along with the descriptive names associated with each:

Addition of hydrogen halides to alkenes
•The hydrogen halides (HCl, HI, HBr) add to alkenes in an electrophilic 
additionto give haloalkanes(alkyl halides).
•For example, ethane reacts with HClto give chloroethane.
•The addition of HClto propene gives 2-chloropropane as the major 
product. 1-chloropropane is hardly observed (very minor product);

•We say that the addition of HClto propene is highly regioselective.
•A regioselectivereaction is one in which one direction of bond 
forming and breaking occurs in preference to all other directions. So 
one of the two possible orientations of addition results preferentially 
over another.
•Markovnikov’s rule: the generalisation that in the addition of 
hydrogen halides (HX) to alkenes the hydrogen will add to the carbon 
of the double bond that has the greater number of hydrogens 
bonded to it compared to the other carbon of the double bond.

•Practice exercise 1 : Name and draw the structural formula for the 
major product for each alkene addition reaction:
Ans: a) 2-iodo-2-methylpropane
b) 1-chloro-1-methylcyclopropane

•The addition of HX to an alkene proceeds by way of a two-step mechanism:
For example, for the addition of HClto 2-butene:
Step 1: Add a proton:
The double bond is a site that is rich in electron density. It acts as a 
nucleophile.
The double bond (nucleophile) attacks the partially positive hydrogen of 
electrophilic species HCl. This is shown by the first curved arrow, which 
shows that the pi bond is breaking, and the electron pair in that bond is used 
to form a new covalent bond with the hydrogen of HCl.
NB! Keep in mind Markovnikov’s rule

The second curved arrow shows the breaking of the polar H-Cl bond, 
with both electrons in that bond being given entirely to Cl, forming Cl-
ion (heterolyticcleavage).
Step 2: Reaction of an electrophile and nucleophile to form a new 
covalent bond:
The chloride ion uses a lone pair of electrons to form a new covalent 
bond with the positively charged carbon of the carbocation.



Regioselectivityand Markovnikov’s rule
•The relative stabilities of carbocationsis the underlying basis for 
Markovnikov’s rule.
•The more stable carbocation is the one that is favoured;
•For example in the addition of HClto propene:
The 1°carbocation is less stable 
than the 2°carbocation. Therefore, 
1-chloropropane is notformed.

•Similarly in the reaction of HClwith 2-methylpropene
The 3°carbocation is more stable than the 1°carbocation, 
therefore 2-chloro-2-methylpropane is formed.

Recap from Lecture 1
This happens due to the inductive effect. The positively charged 
carbon draws electron density towards itself from the alkyl groups 
(electron-donating groups). This allows the positive charge to be 
more delocalised –leading to stability. The more alkyl groups 
substituted, the greater the stability.

•Practice exercise 2: Arrange the following carbocationsin order of 
increasing stability:
1) 
2) 

•Practice exercise 3: propose a mechanism for the addition of HI to 
methylenecyclohexaneto give 1-iodo-1-methylcyclohexane:

•In the presence of peroxides, the major product obtained from the 
addition of HBrto alkenes is the opposite of that expected from the 
Markovnikov’s rule.
•This Anti-Markovnikov addition occurs by means of free radical 
addition mechanism.
•The reaction is initiated by peroxides, which break down to give 
alkoxyradicals (R—O).
•The alkoxyradicals then cause the formation of bromine radicals.
Free Radical Addition of HBr–Anti-Markovnikov 
Addition

•Step 1 Initiation: Formation of radicals:
•Step 2: The bromine radical adds across the double bond to generate 
an alkyl radical on the more substituted carbon atom.
•Step 3: the alkyl radical abstracts a proton from H—Br to generate the 
product and a bromine radical.
The bromine radical 
generated here reacts with 
another alkene molecule, 
continuing the chain.

•For example, free radical addition of HBrto propene in the presence 
of peroxide:
Initiation:
Step 1:
Step 2:  

•With the unsymmetrical alkene 2-methylbut-2-ene, adding the bromine 
radical to the secondary end of the double bond forms the more stable 
tertiary radical.
•This radical intermediate then reacts with HBrto give the anti-
Markovnikov product.

•Practice exercise 4: but-1-ene-2-ylbenzene has the following 
structure:
a) Draw the displayed formula for the major product formed when but-
1-ene-2-ylbenzene reacts with HBrin the presence of tert-butyl 
peroxide.
b) Draw out the mechanism of the reaction.

Addition of water to an alkene: Acid catalysed 
hydration
•In the presence of an acid catalyst, most commonly concentrated sulphuric 
acid (H
2
SO
4
), water adds to the C=C double bond to form an alcohol.
•This addition is known as a hydration, with a hydrogen atom adding to one 
carbon and a hydroxygroup (OH) adding to the other carbon of the double 
bond.
•Hydration of alkenes also follows Markovnikov’s rule; the hydrogen adds to 
the carbon of the double bond that has the greater number of hydrogens.

Hydration follows 
Markovnikov’s rule.
Explained in terms of 
stabilities of carbocations.

•Practice exercise 5: Draw a skeletal formula for the product of the 
acid-catalysed hydration of 1-methylcyclohexene.
Ans: 
Draw the skeletal formula for the product for each of the following 
alkene hydration reactions:

•The mechanism for the addition of H
2
O to an alkene is similar to that 
of the addition of HX to an alkene.
•For example in the acid-catalysed hydration of propene:
Step 1: Add a proton: Note that in the presence of an acid catalyst, H
2
O 
exists as the hydronium ion H
3
O
+
.
The electron pair in the double bond is used to form a new covalent 
bond with hydrogen from the hydronium ion. The result is a secondary 
carbocation (Markovnikov’s rule)

Step 2: Reaction of a nucleophile and electrophile to form a new 
covalent bond.
The carbocation intermediate acts as an electrophile and the water 
that was generated in step 1 acts as a nucleophile. The lone pair of 
electrons on the oxygen of H
2
O is used to form a new covalent bond 
with the positively charged carbon, to complete its valence shell. This 
results in the formation of an oxoniumion. 

Step 3: Take a proton away:
Water in solution acts as a nucleophile and forms a covalent bond with 
the hydrogen from the oxoniumion. The electron pair in the O—H 
bond of the oxoniumion is transferred to the oxygen atom. 
An alcohol is produced, and the acid catalyst is regenerated in the form 
of H
3
O
+
. 

•Practice exercise 6: Propose a mechanism for the acid-catalysed 
hydration of methylenecyclohexaneto give 1-methylcyclohexanol.
methylenecyclohexane